Opinion


REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
THIS CAUSE is before the Court following a March 21, 2018 show cause hearing before the undersigned on why a preliminary injunction in this case should not issue. Although they each were served with the Complaint and with notice of the hearing, none of the Defendants were in attendance.

Based on the argument of Plaintiffs counsel and evidence presented, the Court is persuaded that Plaintiff is likely to succeed on the merits and that injunctive relief is in the public interest. See FTC v. IAB Mktg. Assocs., L.P., 746 F.3d 1228. Accordingly, it is hereby

RECOMMENDED that the Court enter the attached Preliminary Injunction with Asset Freeze and Other Equitable Relief against Thomas Dluca, Louis Gatto, Eric Pinkston, and Scott Chandler.

The parties will have 14 days from the date of being served with a copy of this Report and Recommendation within which to file written objections, if any, for consideration by The Honorable K. Michael Moore, United States District Judge. Failure to file objections [*2]  timely shall bar the parties from a de novo determination by the District Judge of an issue covered in the Report and shall bar the parties from attacking on appeal unobjected-to factual and legal conclusions contained therein, except upon grounds of plain error if necessary in the interest of justice. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 149, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985); Henley v. Johnson, 885 F.2d 790, 794 (1989); 11th Cir.R. 3-1(2016).

DONE AND SUBMITTED at Fort Lauderdale, Florida, this 22nd day of March, 2018.

/s/ Lurana S. Snow

LURANA S. SNOW

UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE



PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION WITH ASSET FREEZE AND OTHER EQUITABLE RELIEF
Plaintiff, the Federal Trade Commission ("FTC"), has filed its Complaint for Permanent Injunction and Other Equitable Relief against Thomas Dluca, Louis Gatto, Eric Pinkston, and Scott Chandler (collectively, "Defendants"), pursuant to Section 13(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act ("FTC Act"), 15 U.S.C. § 53(b) (ECF No. 1), and moved, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(b), for an ex parte temporary restraining order, asset freeze, other equitable relief, and an order to show cause why a preliminary injunction should not issue. On March 12, 2018, the Court issued an ex parte temporary restraining order with an asset freeze and other equitable relief, and set a show cause hearing. Defendants were served with the Complaint, [*3]  Summons, temporary restraining order, and other related papers on March 13, 14, and 15, 2018. On March 21, 2018, a show cause hearing was held.



FINDINGS OF FACT
The Court, having considered the Complaint and evidence in support of a preliminary injunction with an asset freeze and other equitable relief, and being otherwise advised, finds that:

A. This Court has jurisdiction over the subject matter of this case, jurisdiction over all parties hereto, and venue in this district is proper.

B. Section 13(b) of the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C. § 53(b)(2), authorizes this Court to grant the FTC a preliminary injunction upon a showing that, weighing the equities and considering the FTC's ultimate likelihood of success, a preliminary injunction is in the public interest.

C. "Unlike private litigants, the FTC need not demonstrate irreparable injury in order to obtain injunctive relief." FTC v. IAB Mktg. Assocs., LP, 746 F.3d 1228, 1232 (11th Cir. 2014). When a district court balances the public interest against a private interest, the public interest should receive greater weight. FTC v. World Travel Vacation Brokers, 861 F.2d 1020, 1030 (7th Cir. 1988); FTC v. USA Bevs., Inc., 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 39075, at *15 (S.D. Fla. 2005).

D. A proper balance of the equities in this matter favors the FTC. Based upon the audio and video recordings, website screen shots, website captures, consumer declarations, investigator declarations, an expert declaration, and other evidence [*4]  submitted by the FTC, there is good cause to believe that:

1. Defendants are violating and, unless enjoined by this Court, will continue to violate Section 5(a) of the FTC Act;

2. Consumers nationwide have suffered and, unless enjoined by this Court, will continue to suffer harm including economic injury as a result of Defendants' violations of Section 5(a) of the FTC Act;

3. Defendants have received and, unless enjoined by this Court, will continue to receive, ill-gotten gains as a result of their violations of Section 5(a) of the FTC Act; and

4. The private interests of Defendants do not outweigh the public interest in enjoining future law violations, protecting assets or documents, or preserving the Court's ability to award effective full and final relief.

E. The FTC has shown a likelihood that it will ultimately succeed on the merits. Based upon the audio and video recordings, website screen shots, website captures, consumer declarations, investigator declarations, an expert declaration, and other evidence submitted by the FTC, there is good cause to believe that Defendants Dluca, Gatto, Pinkston, and Chandler have engaged in and are likely to engage in acts or practices that violate Section 5(a) of the FTC Act by:

1. falsely representing to consumers that Bitcoin Funding Team and/or My7Network [*5]  were bona fide money-making opportunities, when, in fact, these programs were chain referral schemes; and

2. falsely representing that participants in the Bitcoin Funding Team, My7Network, or JetCoin purported money-making schemes were likely to earn substantial income.

F. This Court finds that the public interest is served by:

1. Enjoining deceptive or unfair acts or practices that violate the law;

2. Maintaining the status quo over assets and business documents relating to Defendants' alleged law violations; and

3. Preserving the Court's ability to award full and effective final relief at trial or other disposition of this matter.

G. Because the balance of the equities tips in the FTC's favor and the FTC is likely to ultimately succeed on the merits of its Complaint, this Court finds that a preliminary injunction with an asset freeze and other equitable relief is warranted and in the public interest.

H. This Court has authority to issue this Order pursuant to Section 13(b) of the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C. § 53(b); Fed. R. Civ. P. 65; and the All Writs Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1651.

I. Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(c), no security is required of any agency of the United States for issuance of a restraining order.



DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Order, the following definitions shall apply:

A. "Asset" or  [*6] "Assets" means any legal or equitable interest in, right to, or claim to any item of economic value, in whole or part, whether tangible or intangible, including, but not limited to, accounts, accounts receivable, cash, certificates of deposit, chattels, checks, contracts, credits, currency, cryptocurrency, fixtures, funds, equipment, income, intellectual property, inventory, instruments, investments, leaseholds, lines of credit, mail, notes, personal property, real property, revenues, securities, shares of stock, trusts, or any interest therein, whether located within or outside the United States.

B. "Defendant(s)" means Thomas Dluca, Louis Gatto, Eric Pinkston, and Scott Chandler, individually, collectively, or in any combination.

C. "Document" is synonymous in meaning and equal in scope to the usage of "document" and "electronically stored information" in Fed. R. Civ. P. 34(a), and includes writings, drawings, graphs, charts, photographs, sound and video recordings, images, Internet sites, web pages, websites, electronic correspondence, including e-mail and instant messages, contracts, accounting data, advertisements, FTP Logs, Server Access Logs, books, written or printed records, handwritten notes, telephone [*7]  logs, telephone scripts, receipt books, ledgers, personal and business canceled checks and check registers, bank statements, appointment books, computer records, customer or sales databases and any other electronically stored information, including Documents located on remote servers or cloud computing systems, and other data or data compilations from which information can be obtained directly or, if necessary, after translation into a reasonably usable form. A draft or non-identical copy is a separate Document within the meaning of the term.

D. "Electronic Data Host" means any person or entity in the business of storing, hosting, or otherwise maintaining electronically stored information. This includes, but is not limited to, any entity hosting a website or server, and any entity providing "cloud based" electronic storage.

E. "Financial Institution" means an insured bank, commercial bank or trust company; a private banker, agency or branch of a foreign bank; a credit union or thrift institution; a broker or dealer in securities or commodities, whether or not registered; an investment banker or investment company; a currency exchange or crypto currency exchange or service provider; an [*8]  issuer, redeemer, or cashier of travelers' checks, checks, money orders, or similar investments; participant in the credit card system, including an operator of the credit card system, a credit card processor, a payment processor, a merchant bank, an acquiring bank, an independent sales organization, a third party processor, or a payment gateway; an insurance company; a dealer in precious metals, stones, or jewels; a pawnbroker; a loan or finance company; a licensed sender of money or other person who engages as a business in the transmission of funds; a telegraph company; persons involved in vehicle or real estate sales, closings, or settlements; a casino, or gaming establishment.

F. "Marketing Program" includes, but is not limited to, any multi-level marketing program, business opportunity, pyramid marketing scheme, Ponzi scheme, or chain marketing scheme.

G. "Material" means likely to affect a person's choice of, or conduct regarding, goods or services.

H. "Person" means an individual, organization, Financial Institution, or other legal entity, including, but not limited to, an association, cooperative, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, proprietorship, or trust, [*9]  or combination thereof.



ORDER

I. PROHIBITED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that Defendants, Defendants' officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with them, who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, in connection with advertising, marketing, promoting, operating, offering for sale, or sale of any Marketing Program, are preliminarily restrained and enjoined from:

A. Engaging in, participating in, or assisting others in engaging in or participating in, any Marketing Program that:

1. Pays compensation for recruiting new members;

2. Encourages or incentivizes members to purchase goods or services to maintain eligibility for bonuses, rewards, or commissions rather than for resale or personal use;

3. Pays any compensation related to the purchase or sale of goods or services unless the majority of such compensation is derived from sales to or purchases by Persons who are not members of the Marketing Program; or

4. Constitutes a pyramid scheme or Ponzi scheme;

B. Misrepresenting, or assisting others in misrepresenting, expressly or by implication, that Defendants' Marketing Programs are structured [*10]  to operate as bona fide moneymaking opportunities; and

C. Misrepresenting, or assisting others in misrepresenting, expressly or by implication, any Material fact, including, but not limited to, that consumers who participate in a Marketing Program will or are likely to receive substantial income.



II. PROHIBITION ON RELEASE OF CUSTOMER INFORMATION
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants, Defendants' officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with any of them who receive actual notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, whether acting directly or indirectly, are hereby preliminarily restrained and enjoined from:

A. Selling, renting, leasing, transferring, or otherwise disclosing the name, address, birth date, telephone number, electronic mail address, credit card number, bank account number, Social Security number, or other financial or identifying information of any Person that any Defendant obtained in connection with any activity that pertains to the subject matter of this Order; and

B. Benefitting from or using the name, address, birth date, telephone number, electronic mail address, credit card number, bank account number, [*11]  Social Security number, or other financial or identifying information of any Person that any Defendant obtained in connection with any activity that pertains to the subject matter of this Order.

Provided, however, that Defendants may disclose such financial or identifying personal information to a law enforcement agency, to their attorneys as required for their defense, or as required by any law, regulation, or court order.



III. ASSET FREEZE
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants and their officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with any of them, who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, are hereby preliminarily restrained and enjoined from directly or indirectly:

A. Assigning, concealing, converting, disbursing, dissipating, encumbering, granting a lien or security interest or other interest in, liquidating, loaning, pledging, relinquishing, selling, spending, transferring, withdrawing, or otherwise disposing of any Asset that is:

1. owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by any Defendant;

2. held, in whole or in part, for the benefit of any Defendant;

3. in the actual or constructive [*12]  possession of any Defendant; or

4. owned, controlled by, in the actual or constructive possession of, or otherwise held for the benefit of, any entity directly or indirectly owned, managed, or controlled by, or under common control by or with any Defendant;

B. Opening or causing to be opened any safe deposit box, commercial mail box, or storage facility belonging to, for the use or benefit of, under the control of, or subject to access by any Defendant;

C. Incurring charges or cash advances on any credit, debit, or checking card issued in the name, individually or jointly, of any Defendant, or of any entity directly or indirectly owned, managed, or controlled by any Defendant; and

D. Cashing or depositing any Asset derived from any Marketing Program prohibited by this Order.

The Assets affected by this Section shall include: (1) all Assets of Defendants as of the time this Order is entered; and (2) for Assets obtained by Defendants after this Order is entered, if those Assets are derived from any activity that is the subject of the Complaint in this matter or that is prohibited by this Order. This Section does not prohibit the repatriation of foreign Assets specifically required by this [*13]  Order.



IV. DUTIES OF ASSET HOLDERS AND OTHER THIRD PARTIES
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that any Financial Institution or Person that has, or that at any time since January 1, 2014, has had, custody or control over a Document or Asset belonging to, for the use or benefit of, or under the control of or subject to access by any Defendant and who receives actual notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, whether acting directly or indirectly, shall:

A. Hold, preserve, and retain within its control and prohibit the withdrawal, removal, alteration, assignment, transfer, pledge, encumbrance, disbursement, dissipation, relinquishment, conversion, sale, or other disposal of any Asset, except (1) as directed by further order of this Court, or (2) by written stipulation of the parties;

B. Deny any Person access to any safe deposit box, commercial mail box, or storage facility belonging to, for the use or benefit of, under the control of, or subject to access by any Defendant, either individually, or jointly;

C. Provide Plaintiff's counsel, within three (3) days of receiving a copy of this Order, a sworn statement setting forth:

1. The identification number of each such account or Asset belonging [*14]  to, for the use or benefit of, under the control of, or subject to access by any Defendant;

2. The balance of each account, or a description of the nature and value of each Asset as of the close of business on the day on which this Order is received, and, if the account or other Asset has been closed or removed, the date closed or removed, the total funds removed or transferred, and the name of the Person to whom such account or Asset was remitted;

3. The identification of any safe deposit box, commercial mail box, or storage facility belonging to, for the use or benefit of, under the control of, or subject to access by any Defendant, individually or jointly; and

4. The cryptographic hash value, time stamp, transaction data, public addresses or other information sufficient to identify, locate, and track cryptocurrency in any blockchain or distributed ledger technology system that is belonging to, for the use or benefit of, under the control of, or subject to access by any Defendant; and

D. Within five (5) business days of receiving a request from Plaintiff's counsel, provide Plaintiff's counsel with all Documents pertaining to such Asset, including, but not limited to, account applications, [*15]  statements, signature cards, checks, drafts, deposit tickets, transfers to and from accounts, wire transfers, wire transfer instructions, all other debit and credit instruments or slips, currency transaction reports, 1099 forms, and all logs and records pertaining to safe deposit boxes, commercial mail boxes, and storage facilities.

Provided, however, that this Section does not prohibit any repatriation of foreign Assets specifically required by this Order.



V. SERVICE OF THIS ORDER
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that copies of this Order may be served by any means, including facsimile transmission, electronic mail or other electronic messaging, personal or overnight delivery, U.S. Mail or FedEx, by agents or employees of the Plaintiff, by any law enforcement agency, or by process server, upon any Person that may have possession, custody, or control of any Asset or Document of any Defendant, or that may be subject to any provision of this Order pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(d)(2). For purposes of this Section, service upon any branch, subsidiary, affiliate or office of any entity shall effect service upon the entire entity.



VI. POSTING NOTICE OF LAWSUIT ON WEB SITES
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, within 24 hours of service [*16]  of this Order, Defendants and each of their successors, assigns, members, officers, agents, employees, and those persons in active concert or participation with them who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, shall take whatever action is necessary to ensure that any website used by any Defendant in connection with the advertising, marketing, and promotion of any Marketing Program, shall:

A. Prominently display the following statement:

The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has filed a lawsuit against Thomas Dluca, Louis Gatto, Eric Pinkston, and Scott Chandler, individually and doing business as Bitcoin Funding Team, My7Network, or JetCoin, alleging that they have engaged in deceptive practices in connection with the advertising, marketing, and promotion of purported money-making opportunities. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida has issued a Preliminary Injunction prohibiting the alleged practices. You may obtain additional information directly from the Federal Trade Commission.

B. Provide a hypertext link to the FTC's home page at www.ftc.gov, or another home page designated by counsel for the FTC.



VII. PRODUCTION OF [*17]  DOCUMENTS, DATA, AND IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, unless already produced to Plaintiff:

A. Within three (3) days of service of this Order, each Defendant shall produce to the FTC at the Office of the Florida Attorney General — Consumer Protection Division, 110 S.E. 6th Street, 10th Floor, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33301, or other location designated by the FTC, for inventory and copying, all Documents, computer equipment, and electronically stored information in any Defendant's possession, custody, or control, that contains information about Defendants' operation or promotion of Bitcoin Funding Team, My7Network, JetCoin, or any other money-making opportunity that Defendants promoted or in which Defendants participated since January 1, 2014. The FTC shall return each item produced for inventory or copying to Defendants within five (5) business days from the date and time of any Defendant's delivery of each such item.

Each Defendant, to the extent he has possession, custody, or control of Documents described above, shall produce the Documents as they are kept in the usual course of business. Each Defendant, to the extent he has possession, custody, or control of [*18]  computer equipment or electronically stored information described above, shall provide the FTC with any necessary means of access to the computer equipment or electronically stored information, including, but not limited to, computer access codes and passwords.

B. Within 48 hours of service of this Order, each Defendant shall:

1. Complete and serve on counsel for the FTC the Electronically Stored Information Statement attached as Attachment A; and

2. Identify for Plaintiff's Counsel:

a. All of Defendants' business premises;

b. Any non-residence where Documents or electronically stored information related to Defendants' operation or promotion of Bitcoin Funding Team, My7Network, JetCoin, or any other money-making opportunity that Defendants promoted or in which Defendants participated are hosted, stored, or otherwise maintained, including, but not limited to, the name and location of any Electronic Data Hosts; and

c. Any non-residence premises where Assets belonging to any Defendant are stored or maintained.



VIII. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES AND ACCOUNTING
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, unless already completed and provided to Plaintiff:

A. Within five (5) days of service of this Order, each Defendant, [*19]  shall prepare and deliver to Plaintiff's counsel:

1. A complete and accurate financial statement on the form attached to this Order as Attachment B disclosing all personal Assets and providing all required attachments;

2. A complete and accurate cryptocurrency financial statement on the form attached to this Order as Attachment C;

3. A complete and accurate consent to release of financial records on the form attached to this Order as Attachment D; and

4. A complete and accurate request for copy of tax return on the form attached to this Order as Attachment E.

B. Within five (5) business days after service of this Order, each Defendant shall prepare and provide to Plaintiff a complete, accurate, and detailed accounting of each Marketing Program advertised, marketed, promoted, offered for sale, distributed, or sold by or on behalf of Defendants since January 1, 2014, including:

1. A brief description of each Marketing Program;

2. Gross revenues (in U.S. dollars) obtained from the advertising, marketing, or sale of each identified Marketing Program;

3. For any website that Defendants used in connection with advertising, marketing, promoting, operating, offering for sale, or sale of any identified [*20]  Marketing Program, provide the website address or Uniform Record Locator (URL), website host, website administrator, and the name, address, telephone number, electronic mail address, and website address, of any Person who controls or has controlled the website's content; and

4. The name, address, telephone number, electronic mail address, website address, and contact Person of each Person that: (i) supplied, developed, administered, formulated, or created each identified Marketing Program; (ii) paid Defendants, whether directly or indirectly, for promoting the Marketing Program; and or (iii) disseminated or published any promotional material on behalf of Defendants or received payment from Defendants for arranging in or assisting in such dissemination or publication.



IX. FOREIGN ASSET REPATRIATION
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, unless already completed, within five (5) days of service of this Order, each Defendant shall:

A. Take all steps necessary to provide Plaintiff's counsel access to all Documents and records that may be held by third parties located outside of the territorial United States of America related to Defendants' operation or promotion of Bitcoin Funding Team, My7Network, [*21]  JetCoin, or any other money-making opportunity that Defendants promoted or in which Defendants participated;

B. Transfer to the territory of the United States all Documents and Assets located in foreign countries which: (1) belong to, are for the use or benefit of, are under the control of any Defendant, individually or jointly; or (2) are held by any Person or entity for the benefit of any Defendant or for the benefit of, any corporation, partnership, asset protection trust, or other entity that is directly or indirectly owned, managed or controlled by any Defendant, individually or jointly; and

C. Hold and retain all repatriated Assets and prevent and disposition, transfer, or dissipation of such Assets except as required by this Order.



X. NON-INTERFERENCE WITH REPATRIATION
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants, Defendants' officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with any of them, who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, are hereby preliminarily restrained and enjoined from taking any action that may result in the encumbrance or dissipation of foreign Assets, or in the hindrance of the [*22]  repatriation required by the Section of this Order entitled "Foreign Asset Repatriation," including, but not limited to:

A. Sending any communication or engaging in any other act, directly or indirectly, that results in a determination by a foreign trustee or other entity that a "duress" event has occurred under the terms of a foreign trust agreement until such time that all Defendants' Assets have been fully repatriated pursuant to this Order; or

B. Notifying any trustee, protector or other agent of any foreign trust or other related entities of either the existence of this Order, or of the fact that repatriation is required pursuant to a court order, until such time that all Defendants' Assets have been fully repatriated pursuant to this Order.



XI. CONSUMER CREDIT REPORTS
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Plaintiff may obtain credit reports concerning any Defendants pursuant to Section 604(a)(1) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681b(a)(1), and that, upon written request, any credit reporting agency from which such reports are requested shall provide them to Plaintiff.



XII. PRESERVATION OF RECORDS
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants, Defendants' officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active [*23]  concert or participation with any of them, who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, are hereby preliminarily restrained and enjoined from altering, concealing, destroying, erasing, falsifying, mutilating, transferring, writing over, or otherwise disposing of, in any manner, directly or indirectly, Documents that relate to: (A) the business practices, Assets, or business or personal finances of any Defendant; or (B) the business practices or finances of entities directly or indirectly under the control of any Defendant.



XIII. REPORT OF NEW BUSINESS ACTIVITY
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants, Defendants' officers, agents, employees, and attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with any of them, who receive actual notice of this Order, whether acting directly or indirectly, are hereby preliminarily restrained and enjoined from creating, operating, or exercising any control over any business entity, whether newly formed or previously inactive, including any partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship, or corporation, without first providing Plaintiff's counsel with a written statement disclosing: [*24]  (A) the name of the business entity; (B) the address telephone number, and any website used by the business entity; (C) the names of the business entity's officers, directors, principals, managers, and employees; and (D) a detailed description of the business entity's intended activities.



XIV. DISTRIBUTION OF ORDER BY DEFENDANTS
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants shall immediately provide a copy of this Order to each affiliate, telemarketer, marketer, sales entity, successor, assign, member, officer, director, employee, agent, independent contractor, client, attorney, spouse, subsidiary, division, and representative of any Defendant, and shall, within ten (10) days from the date of entry of this Order, provide Plaintiff with a sworn statement that Defendant has complied with this provision of the Order and shall list the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and electronic mail addresses of each Person or entity who received a copy of the Order.



XV. RETENTION OF JURISDICTION
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that this Court shall retain jurisdiction of this matter for all purposes.I. INTRODUCTION
Andrew Baker is one of five plaintiffs who filed putative class actions alleging securities law violations by Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. ("DS") and various other defendants involved with the Tezos Initial Coin Offering ("ICO").1Link to the text of the note Unlike the other plaintiffs, Baker initially filed suit in state rather than federal court and he now moves for remand. DLS asks the court to deny Baker's motion or, alternatively, to stay the case pending the Supreme Court's decision in Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, et al., No. 15-1439. Pursuant to Civil [*2]  Local Rule 7-1(b), this matter is suitable for disposition without oral argument and the hearing set for February 8, 2018 is vacated. For the reasons explained below, the case is stayed and Baker's motion to remand is denied without prejudice.



II. DISCUSSION
Whether remand is appropriate in this action involves interpretation of jurisdictional provisions in the Securities Act of 1933 ("Securities Act" or "Act") as amended by the Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act of 1998 ("SLUSA"). Many other Northern District courts have previously explained and analyzed the provisions at issue in similar contexts and that analysis need not be repeated at length here. See, e.g., Elec. Workers Local #357 Pension & Health & Trusts v. Clovis Oncology, Inc., 185 F. Supp. 3d 1172 (N.D. Cal. 2016); Buelow v. Alibaba Grp. Holding Ltd., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 7444 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 20, 2016).

In short, DLS contends removal of this action was proper because SLUSA stripped state courts of jurisdiction over Securities Act covered class actions like this one. Baker, by contrast, argues removal of this action was explicitly barred by the anti-removal provision in 15 U.S.C. § 77v because it does not fit the exceptions to the anti-removal [*3]  provision "provided in section 77p(c)." Specifically, Baker argues: 1) his state law claims were pled in the alternative and thus do not subject him to removal under 77p(b); and 2) the Tezzies (or Tezos tokens) at issue are not "covered securit[ies]" as required for removal under 77p(c).

Baker rightly notes that courts in the Northern District, and throughout the Ninth Circuit, have been nearly uniform in rejecting arguments like those made by DLS and remanding class actions which solely allege claims under the Securities Act. See Guo v. ZTO Express (Cayman) Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 211181, 2017 WL 6547746, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Dec. 22, 2017). DLS correctly points out, however, that the consensus in the Northern District on this issue is not shared across the country. While "most of the district courts in the First, Seventh, Ninth, and Eleventh circuits" have adopted the same approach as the Northern District, the "majority of district courts in the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Tenth circuits have held that SLUSA grants federal courts exclusive jurisdiction over 1933 Act cases and denied remand motions." City of Birmingham Ret. & Relief Sys. v. ZTO Express (Cayman), Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142450, 2017 WL 3750660, at *1 (N.D. Ala. Aug. 29, 2017).

The disagreement on this issue has recently made its way to the Supreme Court. Just three months ago, in November 2017, the Supreme Court heard oral argument in Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement [*4]  Fund, et al., No. 15-1439, a case addressing the contours of state court jurisdiction over Securities Act class actions. In light of this development, and the high likelihood the Supreme Court will issue an opinion in Cyan within the next few months, DLS seeks to stay a decision on Baker's remand motion.

As an initial matter, Baker argues the Court cannot stay these proceedings because it does not have jurisdiction in the first instance. The Ninth Circuit has not yet addressed whether courts must first decide the merits of a motion to remand before determining whether to stay the underlying proceedings. See Garza v. Organon USA, Inc., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 172904, 2013 WL 6443433, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Dec. 9, 2013).2Link to the text of the note Generally, "[a] district court has the inherent power to stay its proceedings. This power to stay is 'incidental to the power inherent in every court to control the disposition of the causes on its docket with economy of time and effort for itself, for counsel, and for litigants.'" Fuller v. AmeriGas Propane, Inc., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71413, 2009 WL 2390358, at *1 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 3, 2009) (quoting Rivers v. Walt Disney Co., 980 F.Supp. 1358, 1360 (C.D. Cal.1997)). In considering whether a stay is appropriate, the court should weigh three factors: "[1] the possible damage which may result from the granting of a stay, [2] the hardship or inequity which a party may suffer in being required to go forward, and [3] the orderly course of justice measured [*5]  in terms of the simplifying or complicating of issues, proof, and questions of law which could be expected to result from a stay." Id. (quoting CMAX, Inc. v. Hall, 300 F.2d 265, 268 (9th Cir. 1962) (citing Landis v. N. Am. Co., 299 U.S. 248, 254-55, 57 S. Ct. 163, 81 L. Ed. 153 (1936))).

Here, a stay poses a minimal risk of harm to Baker. Baker does not seek injunctive relief or time-sensitive remedies that will become permanently unavailable if a stay is issued. Moreover, a stay will not impede the progress of the three related federal actions brought on behalf of the same putative class. By contrast, failing to grant a stay (and remanding the case) would force DLS (and the other defendants) to expend resources defending against state court litigation that is likely to be largely duplicative of the federal actions—resources that will not have to be expended if the Supreme Court's decision in Cyan counsels that remand is inappropriate.

Above all, staying this case serves the orderly course of justice. It is true that, generally, the mere fact one or more appellate cases are pending with potential impact on a district court action will not serve to support a stay request. See Landis, 299 U.S. at 255 ("Only in rare circumstances will a litigant in one cause be compelled to stand aside while a litigant in another settles the rule of [*6]  law that will define the rights of both.") This, however, is one of the rare circumstances in which a short wait for appellate guidance may avoid unnecessary disruption, confusion, and inefficiency. Unlike other Northern District cases in which remands have been granted, this case involves novel questions of federal securities law. The Tezos-related actions currently pending before this Court are among the first to apply federal securities laws to cryptocurrency assets. There is no extensive body of federal law for the San Francisco County Superior Court to apply should this case be remanded. Thus, the risk is higher here than in the average securities case that parallel state and federal proceedings could produce inconsistent (and even contradictory) conclusions regarding key questions of fact and law.

Baker is right that the decision in Cyan will not necessarily be dispositive of whether remand is appropriate. It is possible, for instance, the Supreme Court's interpretation of the relevant provisions will not entirely strip state courts of jurisdiction over securities class actions or address the significance of the distinction between "covered" and not covered securities to the removal [*7]  analysis. That said, the issues in Cyan are not as far removed from the issues at play here as Baker suggests.3Link to the text of the note It seems highly unlikely whatever guidance the Supreme Court provides will have no impact on the determination of whether remand is appropriate. In light of the negligible harm to plaintiff of granting a stay, and the potentially adverse consequences that could result from forging ahead, the most prudent course is to await that guidance.4Link to the text of the note



III. CONCLUSION
This case is stayed pending the Supreme Court's decision in Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, No. 15-1439. Baker's motion to remand is denied without prejudice. [*8]  He may refile his motion, if appropriate, within twenty-one (21) days of the Supreme Court issuing its opinion in Cyan.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: February 1, 2018

/s/ Richard Seeborg

RICHARD SEEBORG

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Three of the actions are pending before this court: GGCC, LLC v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al., Case No. 17-cv-6779; Okusko v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al., Case No. 17-cv-6829; and MacDonald v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al., Case No. 17-cv-7095. The fourth action, Gaviria v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al., Case No. 17-cv-1959, was filed in the Middle District of Florida and was voluntarily dismissed without prejudice on January 23, 2018.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Judge Illston's reasoning in Lauachus v. McKesson Corp., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 54657, 2017 WL 1316884, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 10, 2017), provides an example of how the interests of "judicial economy and consistent determination of issues" may at times require temporarily staying a remand motion even where jurisdiction is in question. In Lauachus, the action that plaintiff sought to remand for lack of subject matter jurisdiction had been tagged for conditional transfer to an MDL. Judge Illston noted that the jurisdictional issue raised by the plaintiff was present across numerous cases in front of the MDL and was likely to be resolved in a matter of months. Under the circumstances, Judge Illston found the plaintiff was unlikely to be prejudiced by a brief stay and that judicial resources were best utilized by waiting for a decision on whether the case would be transferred to the MDL. In the event the case was not transferred, the plaintiff could renew its motion to remand. Judge Illston reached this conclusion despite the fact that two other Northern District judges had remanded similarly situated cases four months prior when there was greater uncertainty regarding the petition to establish the MDL.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Baker acknowledges the petitioner in Cyan advances an interpretation of SLUSA that would prevent all Securities Act claims from being brought in state court. See Reply at 9. Should the Supreme Court adopt this interpretation, remand would undeniably be inappropriate regardless of whether or not Tezzies are covered securities.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
This decision is in accord with courts in other districts that have also stayed motions to remand pending the Supreme Court's decision in Cyan. See City of Birmingham, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142450, 2017 WL 3750660, at *1; Rezko v. XBiotech Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 167959, 2017 WL 4544683, at *1 (W.D. Tex. Oct. 6, 2017); Hao Wu v. Tokai Pharmaceuticals, Case No. 16-125500-MLW, Dkt. 62 (D. Mass. Sept. 28, 2017); St. Lucie Cty. Fire Dist. Firefighters' Pension Tr. Fund v. Sw. Energy Co., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 145297, 2017 WL 3994938, at *1 (S.D. Tex. Sept. 5, 2017). Multiple courts in this district have denied motions to stay remand proceedings pending the Cyan decision, see Guo, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 211181, 2017 WL 6547746, at *2; Seafarers Officers & Emp's Pension Plan v. Apigee Corp., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142292 at *5 (N.D. Cal. Sept. 1, 2017); Book v. ProNAi Therapeutics, Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 90061, 2017 WL 2533664, at *2 (N.D. Cal. June 12, 2017), Clayton v. Tintri, Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 179600, 2017 WL 4876517, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 30, 2017); Olberding v. Avinger, Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114222 at *7 (N.D. Cal. July 21, 2017). Those cases: a) did not involve the same novel legal issues at play here related to cryptocurrency assets; and b) by virtue of being earlier, would have required stays of a longer duration.I. Introduction
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") sues Patrick McDonnell and his company Coin Drop Markets. CFTC alleges defendants "operated a deceptive and fraudulent virtual currency scheme . . . for purported virtual currency trading advice" and "for virtual currency purchases and trading . . . and simply misappropriated [investor] funds." See CFTC Complaint, ECF No. 1, Jan. 18, 2018, at 1 ("CFTC Compl.").

 [*217]  CFTC seeks injunctive relief, monetary penalties, and restitution of funds received in violation of the Commodity Exchange Act ("CEA"). Id. at 11.

Until Congress clarifies the matter, the CFTC has concurrent authority, along with other state and federal administrative agencies, and civil and criminal courts, over dealings in virtual currency. An important nationally and internationally traded commodity, virtual currency is tendered for payment for debts, although, unlike United States currency, [**3]  it is not legal tender that must be accepted. Title 31 U.S.C. § 5103 ("United States coins and currency . . . are legal tender for all debts . . .").



A. Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") Standing
The primary issue raised at the outset of this litigation is whether CFTC has standing to sue defendants on the theory that they have violated the CEA. Title 7 U.S.C. § 1. Presented are two questions that determine the plaintiff's standing: (1) whether virtual currency may be regulated by the CFTC as a commodity; and (2) whether the amendments to the CEA under the Dodd-Frank Act permit the CFTC to exercise its jurisdiction over fraud that does not directly involve the sale of futures or derivative contracts.

Both questions are answered in the affirmative. A "commodity" encompasses virtual currency both in economic function and in the language of the statute. Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (The CEA defines "commodity" as agricultural products and "all other goods and articles . . . and all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in.").

CFTC's broad authority extends to fraud or manipulation in derivatives markets and underlying spot markets. See Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1). CFTC may [**4]  exercise its enforcement power over fraud related to virtual currencies sold in interstate commerce. See Title 17 C.F.R. § 180.1.



B. Injunctive Relief
After hearing testimony from an Investigator in the Division of Enforcement for the CFTC, the court finds the plaintiff has made a preliminary prima facie showing that the defendants committed fraud by misappropriation of investors' funds and misrepresentation through false trading advice and promised future profits.

A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. The court finds a reasonable likelihood that without an injunction the defendants will continue to violate the CEA. An order outlining the terms of relief is issued and attached. See Appendix A, Order of Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief ("App. A, Prelim. Injunction").



II. Facts
Patrick McDonnell and his company CabbageTech, Corp., doing business as Coin Drop Markets ("defendants"), offered fraudulent trading and investment services related to virtual currency, see Description of "Virtual Currencies" infra Part III, in the spring and summer of 2017. Christopher Giglio Declaration, ECF No. 21, Feb. 26, 2018, Ex. 2 ("Giglio Decl.") ¶¶ 13,14.

Customers from the United States and abroad [**5]  paid defendants for "membership" in virtual currency trading groups purported to provide exit prices and profits of up to "300%" per week. Id. ¶¶ 17-20. Defendants advertised their services through "at least two websites, www.coindropmarkets.com and www.coindrops.club," as well as on the social media platform Twitter. Id. ¶¶ 15-17.

"Investors" transferred virtual currency to the defendants for "day" trading. Id. ¶ 21 ("McDonnell claimed that he could  [*218]  generate profits of 2 to 300% each day for [an] Investor . . . and that $1,000 in Litecoin [a type of virtual currency] should be earning $200 to $250 per day through trading.").

After receiving membership payment or virtual currency investments, defendants deleted their "social media accounts" and "websites and ceased communicating with . . . customers around July, 2017." Id. ¶ 26. Defendants provided minimal, if any, virtual currency trading advice and never achieved the promised return on investment. Id. ¶ 27. When customers asked for a return of their membership fee, or virtual currency investment, the defendants refused and misappropriated the funds. Id. ¶¶ 27-32.



III. Background of Bitcoin and Virtual Currencies

A. Description of Virtual [**6]  Currencies
Virtual currencies are generally defined as "digital assets used as a medium of exchange." Skadden's Insights, Bitcoins and Blockchain: The CFTC Takes Notice of Virtual Currencies, Jan., 2016. They are stored electronically in "digital wallets," and exchanged over the internet through a direct peer-to-peer system. Id. They are often described as "cryptocurrencies" because they use "cryptographic protocols to secure transactions . . . recorded on publicly available decentralized ledgers," called "blockchains." Brief of CFTC In Support of Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, ECF No. 21, Feb. 26, 2018, at 4 ("CFTC Brief").

The "blockchain" serves as a digital signature to verify the exchange. See Appendix B, A CFTC Primer on Virtual Currencies, Oct. 17, 2017, at 5 ("App. B, CFTC Primer"). "The public nature of the decentralized ledger allows people to recognize the transfer of virtual currency from one user to another without requiring any central intermediary in which both users need to trust." CFTC Brief, at 4. Some experts believe blockchain technology underlying virtual currencies will serve to "enhance [future] economic efficiency" and have a "broad and lasting impact on [**7]  global financial markets in payments, banking, securities settlement, title recording, cyber security and trade reporting and analysis." Appendix C, United States Senate Banking Committee, Hearing on Virtual Currency, Feb. 6, 2018 (written testimony of Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, CFTC) ("App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony"). Virtual currencies are not backed by any government, fiat currency, or commodity. Robert J. Anello, New-Wave Legal Challenges for Bitcoin and Other CryptoCurrencies, Law Journal Newsletters, Nov. 2017.

They have some characteristics of government paper currency, commodities, and securities. Allison Nathan, Interview with Eric Posner, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research, Mar. 11, 2014 ("It is a lot like gold, in fact. The difference [] is that it is digital rather than a heavy, unwieldy object. That means that it could serve the same purposes as gold in terms of a currency, but much more efficiently because it does not have any mass and can be sent easily from place to place."); cf. Power of the Executive to Change the Gold Value of the Dollar, Columbia Law Review, Vol. 48, No. 3 (Apr. 1948) ("[T]he United States is committed to a policy of international [**8]  cooperation, and in particular, to a program of international stability of [currency] exchange rates . . .").



B. Expansion and Value
The price of Bitcoin, and other virtual currencies, has risen, and then fallen, at extreme rates. Olga Kharif, All you Need to Know About Bitcoin's Rise, From $0.01 to $15,000, Bloomberg Businessweek, Dec. 1, 2017 ("The initial price of bitcoin, set in 2010, was less than 1 cent. Now it's  [*219]  crossed $16,000. Once seen as the province of nerds, libertarians and drug dealers, bitcoin today is drawing millions of dollars from hedge funds.").

As their value has increased, online exchanges have become more accessible allowing more members of the public to trade and invest in virtual currencies.

While there are many Bitcoin exchanges around the world, Coinbase has been the dominant place that ordinary Americans go to buy and sell virtual currency. No company had made it simpler to sign up, link a bank account or debit card, and begin buying Bitcoin.

The number of people with Coinbase accounts has gone from 5.5 million in January [2017] to 13.3 million at the end of November, according to data from the Altana Digital Currency Fund. In late November, Coinbase was sometimes [**9]  getting 100,000 new customers a day — leaving the company with more customers than Charles Schwab and E-Trade.

Nathaniel Popper, Coinbase: The Heart of the Bitcoin Frenzy, N.Y. Times, Dec. 6, 2017; Ian Parker, A Bitcoin A.T.M. Comes To A New York Deli, New Yorker, Sept. 18, 2017 ("A Coinsource A.T.M. accepts dollars and in return adds the bitcoin equivalent (less Coinsource's seven per cent) to a customer's digital wallet.").
According to coinmarketcap.com (viewed Feb. 6, 2018, at approximately 9:10 a.m. EST), there were over 1500 virtual currencies. Bitcoin had the largest market capitalization, valued at $121,264,863,386. Id. A single Bitcoin was valued at $7,196.92. Id. The cheapest virtual currency, Strong Hands, was valued at $0.000001. Id.

The combined market capitalization of all virtual currencies as of January 6, 2018, was roughly $795 billion; by Feb. 6, 2018, the total value had dropped to $329 billion. Coin Market Cap, https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/ (last visited Feb. 6, 2018); Arjun Kharpal, Over $60 Billion Wiped off Value of Cryptocurrencies as Bitcoin Drops Below $8,000 again, CNBC, Feb. 5, 2018 ("It was not only bitcoin that fell either. Other major virtual currencies, [**10]  including ethereum and ripple, fell sharply in the last 24 hours.").



C. Fraud and Crime
The rise in users and value of virtual currencies has been accompanied by increased fraud and criminal activity. Edgar G. Sánchez, Crypto-Currencies: The 21st Century's Money Laundering and Tax Havens, 28 U. Fla. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 167, 169 (2017) ("[T]he newest growing concern with Bitcoin, and crypto-currencies in general, are their ability to wash money and conceal taxable income.").

Silk Road, an online drug market that allowed for purchase through Bitcoin, was one of the earliest and most audacious examples of crime enabled by virtual currencies.

The largest case involving Bitcoin and illegal activity was the Silk Road case, which included billions of dollars in black market drug sales, two federal agents caught (and convicted for) stealing, and murder-for-hire attempts. While the U.S. government claimed a victory in curbing illegal activity facilitated with Bitcoin by shutting down the Silk Road's massive black market for drugs, Bitcoin is still available, and other online black markets have tripled the industry since Silk Road's closure.

Christopher Burks, Bitcoin: Breaking Bad or Breaking Barriers?, 18 N.C.J.L. & Tech. On. 244, 251-52 (2017) (internal citations omitted); see also [**11]  U.S. Attorney's Office EDNY, Long Island Woman Indicted for Bank Fraud and Money Laundering to Support Terrorists, Dec. 14, 2017 (The defendant allegedly "laundered and transferred the funds [using virtual currencies] out of the country to support the Islamic State . . .").
 [*220]  Virtual currency exchanges have been victims of hacking and theft. Reuters Staff, The Coincheck Hack and the Issue With Crypto Assets on Centralized Exchanges, Jan. 29, 2018 ("Hackers have stolen roughly 58 billion yen ($532.6 million) from Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange Coincheck Inc, raising questions about security and regulatory protection in the emerging market of digital assets."); Alex Hern, A History of Bitcoin Hacks, The Guardian, Mar. 18, 2014 ("25,000 bitcoins were stolen from their wallet after hackers compromised the Windows computer they were using. Even at the time, that sum was worth more than $500,000; it would now be worth a little less than £10m.").

These and other criminal acts have led some to call for increased governmental oversight and regulation of virtual currency.

Having delved into the prevalence of money laundering and tax evasion both globally and in the United States, and the rise [**12]  of crypto-currencies and their use in disguising real money, the question remains as to what steps can be taken to legitimize crypto-currencies, or at the very least, put an end to their use for illegal purposes.

Sánchez, supra at 188.


D. Regulation and Oversight of Virtual Currency
Congress has yet to authorize a system to regulate virtual currency. T. Gorman, Blockchain, Virtual Currencies and the Regulators, Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Jan. 11, 2018 ("As the CFTC recently admitted, U.S. law does not provide for 'direct comprehensive U.S. regulation of virtual currencies. To the contrary a multi-regulatory approach is being used.'").

The CFTC, and other agencies, claim concurrent regulatory power over virtual currency in certain settings, but concede their jurisdiction is incomplete. See App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony ("[C]urrent law does not provide any U.S. Federal regulator with such regulatory oversight authority over spot virtual currency platforms [not involving fraud] operating in the United States or abroad."); cf. Doris Kearns Goodwin, The Bully Pulpit, (2013) at 443 ("Roosevelt . . . continued to regard the judicial system as an ineffective arena for controlling giant corporations . . . Regulation, he believed, promised [**13]  a far better remedy. 'The design should be to prevent the abuses incident to the creation of unhealthy and improper combinations [] instead of waiting until they are in existence and then attempting to destroy them by civil or criminal proceedings.'"); cf. Balleisen, Bennear, Kraweic, and Weiner, Policy Shock, (2017) at 543-44 ("[T]ypes of regulatory responses to a crisis may vary along many dimensions. These responses may be robust or cosmetic. They may be structural (reorganizing government or instrumental (changing policy tools).").



1. Potential Virtual Currency Regulation
Until Congress acts to regulate virtual currency the following alternatives appear to be available:

1. No regulation. See, e.g., Nikolei M. Kaplanov, Nerdy Money: Bitcoin, the Private Digital Currency, and the Case Against Its Regulation, 25 Loy. Consumer L. Rev. 111, 113 (2012) ("This Comment will show that the federal government has no legal basis to prohibit bitcoin users from engaging in traditional consumer purchases and transfers. This Comment further argues that the federal government should refrain from passing any laws or regulations limiting the use of bitcoins . . . applying any sort of regulation to bitcoin use, [] would be ineffective and contrary to the interest of the [**14]  United States consumers.").

2. Partial regulation through criminal law prosecutions of Ponzi-like schemes  [*221]  by the Department of Justice, or state criminal agencies, or civil substantive suits based on allegations of fraud. See, e.g., United States v. Faiella, 39 F. Supp. 3d 544, 545 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) ("Defendants in this case are charged in connection with their operation of an underground market in the virtual currency 'Bitcoin' via the website 'Silk Road.'"); United States v. Lord, No. CR 15-00240-01/02, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60508, 2017 WL 1424806, at *2 (W.D. La. Apr. 20, 2017) ("Counts 2-14 charged Defendants with various other crimes associated with operating their bitcoin exchange business.").

3. Regulation by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC"). See infra Part III.D.2.

4. Regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") as securities. See, e.g., SEC v. Plexcorps, 17-CV-7007 (E.D.N.Y. Filed Dec. 1, 2017) SEC Compl., ECF No. 1 ("This is an emergency action to stop Lacroix, a recidivist securities law violator in Canada, and his partner Paradis-Royer, from further misappropriating investor funds illegally raised through the fraudulent and unregistered offer and sale of securities called 'PlexCoin' or 'PlexCoin Tokens' in a purported 'Initial Coin Offering.'"); see also Jon Hill, Accused Fraudster [**15]  Says Cryptocurrencies Aren't Securities, Feb. 27, 2018 ("According to the government, those blockchain based tokens were securities . . .").

5. Regulation by the Treasury Department's Financial Enforcement Network ("FinCEN"). See, e.g., FinCEN, Treasury's First Action Against a Foreign-Located Money Services Business, U.S. Department of the Treasury, Jul. 27, 2017 ("The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), working in coordination with the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of California, assessed a $110,003,314 civil money penalty today against BTC-e [a virtual currency exchange] for willfully violating U.S. anti-money laundering laws.").

6. Regulation by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"). See, e.g., United States v. Coinbase, Inc., No. 17-CV-01431-JSC, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 111756, 2017 WL 3035164, at *1 (N.D. Cal. July 18, 2017) ("In March 2014, the IRS issued Notice 2014-21, which describes how the IRS applies U.S. tax principles to transactions involving virtual currency. (Case No. 3:16-cv-06658-JSC, Dkt. No. 2-4 at 3 ¶ 6.) In Notice 2014-21, the IRS stated its position: virtual currencies that can be converted into traditional currency are property for tax purposes, and a taxpayer can have a gain or loss on the sale or exchange of a virtual currency, depending [**16]  on the taxpayer's cost to purchase the virtual currency.").

7. Regulation by private exchanges. See, e.g., Asian Review, Japan Tries Light Touch in Bringing Cryptocurrencies out of Regulatory Limbo, NIKKEI, Sept. 30, 2017 ("[T]here is a growing need for exchange operators to self-police to protect investors from taking on too much risk and other dangers.").

8. State regulations. See, e.g., Press Release, DFS Grants Virtual Currency License to Coinbase, Inc., N.Y. Department of Financial Services, Jan. 17, 2017 ("DFS has approved six firms for virtual currency charters or licenses, while denying those applications that did not meet DFS's standards. In addition to bitFlyer USA, DFS has granted licenses to Coinbase Inc., XRP II and Circle Internet Financial, and charters to Gemini Trust Company and itBit Trust Company.").

9. A combination of any of the above.



2. Oversight by CFTC
The CFTC is one of the federal administrative bodies currently exercising partial  [*222]  supervision of virtual currencies. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman Giancarlo Statement on Virtual Currencies, CFTC, Jan. 4, 2018 ("One thing is certain: ignoring virtual currency trading will not make it go away. Nor is it a responsible [**17]  regulatory strategy. The CFTC has an important role to play.").

Administrative and civil action has been utilized by the CFTC to expand its control:

On September 17, 2015, the [CFTC] issued an [administrative] order (the Coinflip Order) filing and simultaneously settling charges against Coinflip, Inc. (Coinflip) and its chief executive officer. In the Coinflip Order, the CFTC took the view for the first time that bitcoin and other virtual currencies are commodities subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) and CFTC regulations.

Conrad Bahlke, Recent Developments in the Regulatory Treatment of Bitcoin, 28 No. 1 Intell. Prop. & Tech. L.J. 6 (2016) (internal citations omitted); see also Reuters, U.S. CFTC Sues Three Virtual Currency Operators for Fraud, N.Y. Times, Jan. 19, 2018 ("The U.S. derivatives watchdog said on Friday that it has filed charges against three separate virtual currency operators alleging the defendants had defrauded customers and broken other commodity trading rules, in a further sign regulators globally are cracking down on the emerging asset class."); CFTC Charges Randall Crater, Mark Gillespie and My Big Coin Pay Inc. with Fraud and Misappropriation in Ongoing Virtual [**18]  Currency Scam, Jan. 24, 2018 ("The [CFTC] today announced the filing of a federal court enforcement action under seal on January 16, 2018, charging commodity fraud and misappropriation related to the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin . . .").
Legitimization and regulation of virtual currencies has followed from the CFTC's allowance of futures trading on certified exchanges. Akin Oyedele, Bitcoin Futures Trading gets Green Light from [U.S.] Regulators, Business Insider, Dec. 1, 2017 ("In a statement, the CFTC said the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the CBOE Futures Exchange self-certified new contracts for bitcoin futures products. The Cantor Exchange self-certified a new contract for bitcoin binary options. The futures contracts will make it possible to bet on bitcoin prices without buying the cryptocurrency."). Two futures exchanges, Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the CBOE Futures Exchange, as of February 23, 2018, exceeded "$150 million in daily trading volume." CFTC Brief, at 6. The CFTC has "actively policed" futures exchanges for "violating core principles" such as "failing to enforce its prohibitions against unlawful wash trading and [**19]  prearranged trades." Id.; see In Re TeraExchange LLC, CFTC No.15-33, 2015 WL 5658082 (Sept. 24, 2015).



3. Concurrent Oversight from Other Agencies
The SEC, IRS, DOJ, Treasury Department, and state agencies have increased their regulatory action in the field of virtual currencies without displacing CFTC's concurrent authority. Most current regulatory action takes the form of pursuing criminal and fraudulent conduct after it occurs.

A new division of the Securities and Exchange Commission dedicated to socalled "initial coin offerings" (ICOs) filed its first charges on Friday, targeting a scam that reportedly raised $15 million from thousands of investors by promising a 13-fold profit in less than a month.

In a criminal complaint filed in Brooklyn federal court, the new SEC division, known as the Cyber Unit, describes how Dominic Lacroix sold digital tokens known as "PlexCoins" as part of a purported  [*223]  plan "to increase access to cryptocurrency services" across the world.

Jeff John Roberts, The SEC's New Cyber Unit Just Filed Its First Charges Over an ICO Scam, Dec. 4, 2017; Robert J. Anello, New-Wave Legal Challenges for Bitcoin and Other CryptoCurrencies, Law Journal Newsletters, Nov. 2017 ("Over the last few months the SEC has demonstrated that it intends [**20]  to pursue enforcement of securities law on certain cryptocurrency transactions, especially increasingly popular [Initial Coin Offerings], in response to concerns about fraud and manipulation."); Tara Siegel Bernard, When Trading in Bitcoin, Keep the Tax Man in Mind, N.Y. Times, Jan. 18, 2018 ("In late 2016, the I.R.S. made it clear that it was searching for cryptocurrency tax evaders: The agency sent a broad request to Coinbase, the largest Bitcoin exchange in the United States, requesting records for all customers who bought digital currency from the company from 2013 to 2015.").


IV. Law

A. Jurisdiction
District courts have jurisdiction over any action in which the United States is a plaintiff. U.S. Const. Art. III § 2 ("The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases . . . [or] Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party."); 28 U.S.C. § 1345 ("Except as otherwise provided by Act of Congress, the district courts shall have original jurisdiction of all civil actions, suits or proceedings commenced by the United States, or by any agency or officer thereof expressly authorized to sue by Act of Congress.").

Under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 district courts also "have original jurisdiction of all civil actions arising under the Constitution, laws, [**21]  or treaties of the United States." See U.S. ex rel. Thistlethwaite v. Dowty Woodville Polymer, Ltd., 110 F.3d 861, 864 (2d Cir. 1997) ("[T]he subject matter jurisdiction provisions of Title 28 having broadest application are those granting the district courts power to entertain cases based on federal questions.").



B. Standing
Pursuant to Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) the CFTC may seek injunctive or other relief when it believes that a person or entity is in violation of the CEA. ("[T]he Commission may bring an action in the proper district court of the United States . . . to enjoin such act or practice, or to enforce compliance with this chapter, or any rule, regulation or order thereunder, and said courts shall have jurisdiction to entertain such actions."); see also U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Parnon Energy Inc., 875 F. Supp. 2d 233, 241 (S.D.N.Y. 2012) ("The Commission may [] bring claims alleging violations of the CEA."). Relief may be sought in the "district wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts business or in the district where the act or practice occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur." Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(e).



1. Enforcement Power of CFTC
Exclusive jurisdiction over "accounts, agreements . . . and transactions involving swaps or contracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery" has been granted to the CFTC. Title 7 U.S.C. § 2 (emphasis added). Any commodity traded as a future [**22]  must be traded on a commodity exchange approved by the CFTC. Title 7 U.S.C. § 6.

The CEA and its "remedial statutes" are to be "construed liberally" to allow for broad market protection. R&W Tech. Servs. Ltd. v. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, 205 F.3d 165, 173 (5th Cir. 2000) ("In 1974, Congress gave the Commission even greater enforcement powers, in part because of the fear that unscrupulous individuals were encouraging amateurs to trade in the commodities markets  [*224]  through fraudulent advertising. Remedial statutes are to be construed liberally, and in an era of increasing individual participation in commodities markets, the need for such protection has not lessened.").

The court generally defers to an agency's interpretation of a statute "that the agency is responsible for administering." Sierra Club, Inc. v. Leavitt, 488 F.3d 904, 911-12 (11th Cir. 2007) (citing Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1984)); Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Am. Precious Metals, LLC, 845 F. Supp. 2d 1279, 1282-83 (S.D. Fla. 2011) ("Chevron applies to the instant case because the CFTC is construing a jurisdictional provision of the CEA—a statute it is responsible for administering.") (emphasis in original).

Full deference is dependent on whether the agency's interpretation followed a formal rulemaking process. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Sterling Trading Grp., Inc., 605 F. Supp. 2d 1245, 1265-66 (S.D. Fla. 2009) (citing TVA v. Whitman, 336 F.3d 1236, 1250 (11th Cir. 2003)) ("Chevron deference is confined to those instances in which the agency renders its interpretation in the course of a rulemaking proceeding or adjudication. [E]ven if an agency's interpretation of its [**23]  own statute is advanced in the course of litigation rather than through a rulemaking or agency adjudication, courts will still pay some deference to the agency's interpretation.").



a. Virtual Currencies are Commodities
Black's Law Dictionary defines a commodity as "an article of trade or commerce." Bryan Garner, Black's Law Dictionary, (10th ed. 2014). Merriam Webster defines it as "[a]n economic good . . . [or] an article of commerce . . ." Merriam Webster, https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/commodity (last visited Feb. 5, 2018).

Commentators have argued that based on common usage, virtual currency should be interpreted as a commodity.

It would make sense for regulators to treat Bitcoin as a commodity. Commodities are generally defined as "goods sold in the market with a quality and value uniform throughout the world." This categorization would be appropriate because it realistically reflects the economic behavior of Bitcoin users and squares with traditional economic conceptions of exchange.

Mitchell Prentis, Digital Metal: Regulating Bitcoin As A Commodity, 66 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 609, 626 (2015).
Some propose that because virtual currencies provide a "store of value" they function as commodities:

A commodity is any [**24]  item that "accommodates" our physical wants and needs. And one of these physical wants is the need for a store of value. Throughout history humans have used different commodities as a store of value - even cocoa beans - but, more persistently, gold. In contrast, a security is any instrument that is "secured" against something else. As a currency is usually secured by a commodity or a government's ability to tax and defend, it is considered to be a security. By these definitions, bitcoin with a lower case "b," is a commodity, and not a currency, while Bitcoin with a capital "B" is the technology, or network, that bitcoin moves across. The analogy would be Shale technology versus shale oil.

Jeff Currie, Bullion Bests bitcoin, Not Bitcoin, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research, Mar. 11, 2014.
 [*225]  Others argue virtual currencies are commodities because they serve as a type of monetary exchange:

Bitcoin should primarily be considered a commodity because it serves the function of money in its community of users. Users exchange Bitcoins to obtain property that they desire. In his seminal work, Man, Economy, and State, Murray Rothbard argues that all monetary exchanges are actually indirect commodity [**25]  exchanges. Rothbard supports his proposition by tracing the development of money and exchange. Before the widespread adoption of a common form of money, people had to engage in bartering, or "direct exchange," in order to complete transactions . . .

Furthermore, while Bitcoin acts as a money commodity in its community of users, from a pricing standpoint, it is valued like other commodities. The price of traditional commodities, like gold, silver, and agricultural products, vary in accordance with their demand and scarcity. When more people want a commodity that has a fixed supply, the price rises.

Similarly, the price of Bitcoin fluctuates according to the same fixed supply model. Bitcoins are scarce because the algorithm controlling how many Bitcoins are released into the market through mining [] is designed to taper the supply of bitcoins, until no more are created. Bitcoins are considered rare because there is a fixed supply of them, leading users to be willing to pay increasing prices to control them. The value of a Bitcoin is ultimately driven by supply and demand—a coin is worth whatever someone is willing to pay for it.

Prentis, at 628-29 (internal citations omitted).


b. Commodity Exchange Act's [**26]  Definition of "Commodity"
CEA defines "commodities" as "wheat, cotton, rice, corn, oats, barley, rye, flaxseed, grain sorghums, mill feeds, butter, eggs, Solanum tuberosum (Irish potatoes), wool, wool tops, fats and oils (including lard, tallow, cottonseed oil, peanut oil, soybean oil, and all other fats and oils), cottonseed meal, cottonseed, peanuts, soybeans, soybean meal, livestock, livestock products, and frozen concentrated orange juice, and all other goods and articles . . . and all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in." Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (emphasis added).

The original grant of power to the CEA was designed to control trading in agricultural commodities. Other goods, as well as services, rights and interests, are now covered by the statute. See, e.g., United States v. Brooks, 681 F.3d 678, 694 (5th Cir. 2012) ("Natural gas is plainly a 'good' or 'article.' The questions thus turns on whether it is a good 'in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt with.'").

The CEA covers intangible commodities. See, e.g., In re Barclays PLC, CFTC No. 15-25 (May 20, 2015) (regulating fixed interest rate benchmarks as commodities); cf. Andrews v. Blick Art Materials, LLC, 268 F. Supp. 3d 381, 395-96 (E.D.N.Y. 2017) (quoting Pennsylvania Dep't of Corr. v. Yeskey, 524 U.S. 206, 212, 118 S. Ct. 1952, 141 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1998)) ("That [**27]  the meteoric rise of virtual reality through the Internet and its impact on communal and commercial affairs could not have been anticipated by Congress does not mean the law's application to the Internet and website is ambiguous; 'the fact that a statute can be applied in situations not expressly anticipated by Congress  [*226]  does not demonstrate ambiguity. It demonstrates breadth.'").



c. CFTC's Interpretation of "Commodity"
After an administrative proceeding in 2015, the CFTC issued an order finding, for the first time, that virtual currencies can be classified as commodities. In the Matter of: Coinflip, Inc., CFTC Docket No. 15-29 ("Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are encompassed in the definition and properly defined as commodities.").

Multiple statements defining virtual currency as a commodity have been issued by the CFTC. See App. B, CFTC Primer, at 11 ("The definition of 'commodity' in the CEA is broad . . . It can mean physical commodity, such as an agricultural product . . . It can mean currency or interest rate."); CFTC Launches Virtual Currency Resource Web Page, Press Release, Dec. 15, 2017 ("Bitcoin and other virtual currencies have been determined to be commodities under the Commodity Exchange [**28]  Act (CEA). The [CFTC] primarily regulates commodity derivatives contracts that are based on underlying commodities. While its regulatory oversight authority over commodity cash markets is limited, the CFTC maintains general anti-fraud and manipulation enforcement authority over virtual currency cash markets as a commodity in interstate commerce.").



d. Derivative Contracts and Futures
Regulatory authority over commodities traded as futures and derivatives has been granted to CFTC. Inv. Co. Inst. v. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, 720 F.3d 370, 372, 405 U.S. App. D.C. 366 (D.C. Cir. 2013) ("The Commodity Exchange Act (CEA), Title 7, United States Code, Chapter 1, establishes and defines the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Under this Act, the Commission has regulatory jurisdiction over a wide variety of markets in futures and derivatives, that is, contracts deriving their value from underlying assets.").

Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) of the CEA makes it unlawful for any person to:

use or employ, in connection with any swap, or a contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, any manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance, in contravention of such rules and regulations as the Commission shall promulgate by not later than 1 year after July [**29]  21, 2010 . . . (emphasis added).

17 C.F.R. § 180.1 further defines the regulatory power of the CFTC:

(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, in connection with any swap, or contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or contract for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, to intentionally or recklessly:

(1) Use or employ, or attempt to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;

(2) Make, or attempt to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made not untrue or misleading;

(3) Engage, or attempt to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit . . .

Liability, under the CEA, for commodity fraud, is shown by: "(1) the making of a misrepresentation, misleading statement, or a deceptive omission; (2) scienter; and (3) materiality." Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, v. Commodity Inv. Grp., Inc., No. 05 CIV 5741(HB), 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5772, 2006 WL 353466, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 11, 2006)  [*227]  (quoting CFTC v. R.J. Fitzgerald & Co., Inc., 310 F.3d 1321, 1328 (11th Cir. 2002)).



e. Regulation of Spot Market Fraud
The CFTC has recently expanded its enforcement to fraud related to spot markets underlying the (already regulated) derivative markets. See, e.g., App. B, CFTC Primer (finding the CFTC has [**30]  jurisdiction "if there is fraud or manipulation involving a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce"); CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., Case No. 17-7181 (S.D.N.Y. Filed Sept. 21, 2017) (suit brought by the CFTC alleging a Bitcoin Ponzi scheme, not involving future contracts).

In Gelfman, as in the instant case, the CFTC relied on the broad statutory authority in Section 9(1) of the CEA, and regulatory authority under 17 C.F.R. § 180.1. Specifically, the language in § 180.1 prohibiting "any person, directly or indirectly, in connection with any . . . contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce" from using a "manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud," or making "any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact."

The portion of the statute delegating oversight authority over "contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce" allows CFTC to enforce its mandate in cases not directly involving future trades. 17 C.F.R. § 180.1 (emphasis added); see Gary DeWaal, CFTC Files Charges Alleging Bitcoin Ponzi Scheme Not Involving Derivatives, Sept. 24, 2017 ("The CFTC brought its current action [Gelfman] under a relatively new provision of law (enacted as part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act) [**31]  and Commission regulation that prohibits any person from using a manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance in connection with any 'contract for sale of any commodity in interstate commerce' — not solely in connection with swaps or a commodity for future delivery.").

Where a futures market exists for a good, service, right, or interest, it may be regulated by CFTC, as a commodity, without regard to whether the dispute involves futures contracts. See, e.g., Brooks, 681 F.3d at 694-95 ("[F]utures contracts for natural gas are traded on NYMEX, and those futures are derivative of natural gas traded at Henry Hub. Nonetheless, the record shows that natural gas may be moved from any location to Henry Hub through the national pipeline system. Thus, it would be peculiar that natural gas at another hub is not a commodity, but suddenly becomes a commodity solely on the basis that it passes through Henry Hub, and ceases to be a commodity once it moves onto some other locale. While the price of that commodity may fluctuate with its location, and the forces of supply and demand at that location, the actual nature of the 'good' does not change.").

CFTC does not have regulatory authority over simple quick cash or spot transactions [**32]  that do not involve fraud or manipulation. Title 7 U.S.C. § 2(c)(2)(C)(i)(II)(bb)(AA) (The CFTC does not have jurisdiction over "spot" transactions that "[result] in actual delivery within 2 days."). This boundary has been recognized by the CFTC. It has not attempted to regulate spot trades, unless there is evidence of manipulation or fraud. See App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony ("[T]he CFTC does not have authority to conduct regulatory oversight over spot virtual currency platforms or other cash commodities, including imposing registration requirements, surveillance and monitoring, transaction reporting, compliance with personnel conduct standards, customer education, capital adequacy, trading system safeguards, cyber security examinations or other requirements.").



 [*228]  2. Concurrent Jurisdiction
Federal agencies may have concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over a particular issue or area. See, e.g., Todd S. Aagaard, Regulatory Overlap, Overlapping Legal Fields, and Statutory Discontinuities, 29 Va. Envtl. L.J. 237, 240 (2011)) ("[T]he Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) manage overlapping statutory authorities. Both the EPA and OSHA regulate certain risks in the workplace arising [**33]  from exposures to hazardous and toxic substances.").

Agencies often cooperate to enforce their overlapping powers.

[Agencies] have explored joint rulemaking, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Transportation (DOT) collaboration on fuel standards. They have discussed coordination in individual-level adjudication, such as the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) partnering in cases involving persons without proper documentation. And they have analyzed agency collaboration in shaping policy in complex and novel areas, such as work by DHS and the National Security Agency (NSA) to combat cyber threats.

Daniel A. Farber & Anne Joseph O'Connell, Agencies As Adversaries, 105 Cal. L. Rev. 1375, 1384 (2017); but see Hunter v. F.E.R.C., 711 F.3d 155, 157, 404 U.S. App. D.C. 250 (D.C. Cir. 2013) ("Stated simply, Congress crafted CEA section 2(a)(1)(A) to give the CFTC exclusive jurisdiction over transactions conducted on futures markets.").


C. Preliminary Injunction Standard
Under Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) the CFTC may seek injunctive or other relief when it concludes that a person or entity is in violation of the CEA. "The CFTC is entitled to a preliminary injunction upon a prima facie showing that defendants have violated the Act and 'that there is a reasonable likelihood that [**34]  the wrong will be repeated.'" Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, v. Commodity Inv. Grp., Inc., No. 05 CIV 5741(HB), 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5772, 2006 WL 353466, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 11, 2006) (quoting CFTC v. British Am. Commodity Options Corp., 560 F.2d 135, 141 (2d Cir.1977)). When enforcing a statutorily prescribed injunction, the CFTC "need not prove irreparable injury or the inadequacy of other remedies as required in private injunctive suits." British Am., 560 F.2d at 141. Likelihood of future violations may be inferred from a "defendant's past conduct." CFTC v. Am. Bd. of Trade, Inc., 803 F.2d 1242, 1251 (2d Cir. 1986).



V. Application of Law

A. CFTC Standing
The CFTC has standing pursuant to Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) to seek injunctive and other relief related to misleading advice, and the fraudulent scheme and misappropriation of virtual currencies by defendants.



1. Virtual Currencies as Commodities
Virtual currencies can be regulated by CFTC as a commodity. Virtual currencies are "goods" exchanged in a market for a uniform quality and value. Mitchell Prentis, Digital Metal: Regulating Bitcoin As A Commodity, 66 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 609, 626 (2015). They fall well-within the common definition of "commodity" as well as the CEA's definition of "commodities" as "all other goods and articles . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in." Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9).

The jurisdictional authority of CFTC to regulate virtual currencies as commodities does not preclude other agencies from exercising their regulatory power when virtual currencies function [**35]  differently than derivative commodities. See,  [*229]  e.g., Jay Clayton [SEC Chair] and Christopher Giancarlo [CFTC Chair], Regulators are Looking at Cryptocurrency, Wall Street Journal, Jan. 24, 2018 ("The SEC does not have direct oversight of transactions in currencies or commodities. Yet some products that are labeled cryptocurrencies have characteristics that make them securities. The offer, sale and trading of such products must be carried out in compliance with securities law. The SEC will vigorously pursue those who seek to evade the registration, disclosure and antifraud requirements of our securities laws.").

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. ("CME") has filed an amicus brief. See ECF No. 27, Mar. 6, 2018. It claims to operate the "world's leading derivatives marketplace." Id. at 1. It supports the view that virtual currencies are commodities subject to the CFTC's regulatory protections. It writes:

CME offers for the Court's consideration an explanation of the possible consequences of a determination that a virtual currency such as bitcoin is not a commodity. Such a determination would put in jeopardy CME's and its market participants' expectation to rely on . . . the CFTC's regulatory protections [**36]  for commodity derivatives contracts based on virtual currencies. This legal uncertainty would substantially disrupt the settled expectations of CME and numerous market participants who are trading bitcoin futures for purposes of hedging cash market exposures or making a market in bitcoin futures by offering liquidity, in addition to market professionals that clear, broker or manage virtual currency futures trading activity.

Id. at 2.


2. CFTC Jurisdiction Over Virtual Currency Fraud
CFTC has jurisdictional authority to bring suit against defendants utilizing a scheme to defraud investors through a "contract [for] sale of [a] commodity in interstate commerce." Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1). Although the CFTC has traditionally limited its jurisdiction primarily to "future" contracts for commodities, its expansion into spot trade commodity fraud is justified by statutory and regulatory guidelines. See CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., Case No. 17-7181 (S.D.N.Y. Filed Sept. 21, 2017); see also Gary DeWaal, CFTC Files Charges Alleging Bitcoin Ponzi Scheme Not Involving Derivatives, Sept. 24, 2017 ("This CFTC complaint [CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc.] has significant ramifications beyond its four corners. It represents a [**37]  powerful statement by the Commission that it will exercise jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies when there is potential fraud — even if the fraud does not involve derivatives based on cryptocurrencies.").

Language in 7 U.S.C. § 9(1), and 17 C.F.R. § 180.1, establish the CFTC's regulatory authority over the manipulative schemes, fraud, and misleading statements alleged in the complaint. 17 C.F.R. § 180.1 ("It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, in connection . . . [with any] contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce . . . to [u]se or employ, or attempt to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud; [m]ake, or attempt to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made not untrue or misleading; [e]ngage, or attempt to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit . . .").



B. Prima Facie Showing of Fraud Committed by Defendants
CFTC has made a prima facie showing that the defendants committed  [*230]  fraud by misappropriation of investors' funds and misrepresentation of trading advice and future profits promised to customers. CFTC [**38]  Brief, at 11 (citing Giglio Decl. ¶ 26) ("[O]nce Defendants had solicited and obtained [] Customer funds for trading by Defendants on behalf of customers, Defendants ceased communicating with the customers and misappropriated the customers' funds."). The intentional nature of the defendants' conduct, as required by 17 C.F.R. § 180.1, is evidenced by the blatant disregard of customers' complaints and their refusal to return investors' funds. See Giglio Decl. ¶¶ 29-32; see also Hr'g Tr., Mar. 6, 2018.



C. Preliminary Injunction
A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. The court concludes that without an injunction there is a reasonable likelihood that defendants will continue to violate the CEA. A separate order outlining the terms of the relief is issued. See App. A, Prelim. Injunction.



D. Appropriate Research by Court
In deciding jurisdictional, standing and other issues fundamental to the present litigation, the court has engaged in extensive background research, but not on the specific frauds charged. This is appropriate.

The ABA has issued the following opinion related to individual research by the court:

Easy access to a vast amount of information available on the Internet exposes judges [**39]  to potential ethical problems. Judges risk violating the Model Code of Judicial Conduct by searching the Internet for information related to participants or facts in a proceeding. Independent investigation of adjudicative facts generally is prohibited unless the information is properly subject to judicial notice. The restriction on independent investigation includes individuals subject to the judge's direction and control.

Committee on Ethics and Responsibility, Independent Factual Research by Judges Via Internet, Formal Opinion 478, Dec. 8, 2017 (ABA) (emphasis added).
It is appropriate and necessary for the judge to do research required by a case in order to understand the context and background of the issues involved so long as the judge indicates to the parties the research and conclusions, by opinions and otherwise, so they may contest and clarify. See Abrams, Brewer, Medwed, et al., Evidence Cases and Materials (10th Ed. 2017) (Ch. 9 "Judicial Notice"). It would be a misapprehension of the ABA rule to conclude otherwise.

Adjudicative facts involving defendants' alleged activities have not been the subject of investigation by the court, except at an evidentiary hearing. See Hr'g [**40]  Tr., Mar. 6, 2018.



VI. Conclusion
CFTC has standing to exercise its enforcement power over fraud related to virtual currencies sold in interstate commerce. A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. See App. A, Prelim. Injunction.

The individual defendant's pro se motion to "Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction" is denied. ECF No. 18, Feb. 15, 2018. This court has subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1345. The CFTC has adequately pled and for purpose of a preliminary injunction proved its claim of fraud in violation of the CEA.

Any person claiming improper application of the injunctive power of the court may seek relief by motion.

SO ORDERED.

/s/ Jack B. Weinstein

Jack B. Weinstein

Senior United States District Judge

Dated: March 6, 2018

Brooklyn, New York

 [*231]  Appendix A



ORDER OF PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION AND OTHER RELIEF

I. INTRODUCTION
On January 18, 2018, Plaintiff Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("Plaintiff" or "Commission") filed a Complaint for Injunctive and Other Equitable Relief and for Civil Monetary Penalties Under the Commodity Exchange Act and Commission Regulations ("Complaint") against Defendants Patrick K. McDonnell ("McDonnell") and CabbageTech, Corp. d/b/a Coin Drop [**41]  Markets ("CDM") (collectively, "Defendants") pursuant to Section 6c(a) of the Commodity Exchange Act ("Act"), 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1 (2012).

On January 30, 2018, the court directed the parties to appear for an evidentiary hearing at which the court would consider temporary relief and further administration of the action. ECF No. 9. Subsequent Orders directed the parties to address the Commission's authority to bring this action and notified the parties that the court would hear the parties on jurisdictional, standing, and other issues at the hearing, set for March 6, 2018. ECF No. 10, ECF No. 17.

On February 26, 2018, the Commission filed its briefs and supporting documents, including the Brief of Commodity Futures Trading Commission in Support of a Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, the Declaration of Christopher Giglio, that set forth its arguments, including advocating for the issuance of an order (1) prohibiting Defendants from further violating Section 6(c)(1) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) (2012), and Commission Regulation ("Regulation") 180.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 180.1(a) (2017); (2) preserving the books and records of Defendants, and providing the Commission with access thereto; and (3) ordering Defendants to submit to an interim accounting on an expedited [**42]  basis.

On March 6, 2018, the court, with advance notice, see ECF No. 23, Feb. 27, 2018, held an evidentiary hearing on the request for preliminary injunction.

The court has considered the Brief of Commodity Futures Trading Commission in Support of a Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, the Complaint, the Declaration of Christopher Giglio, all filings by Defendant McDonnell to date, and testimony and evidence introduced at the March 6, 2018 hearing. It finds that there is good cause for the entry of this Order and that there is no just reason for delay. The court therefore directs the entry of the following findings of fact, conclusions of law, and preliminary injunction and other equitable relief pursuant to Section 6c of the Act, as amended, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1.



II. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS THE COURT FINDS AND CONCLUDES AS FOLLOWS:

A. FINDINGS OF FACT

The Parties
1. Plaintiff Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("Commission" or "CFTC") is an independent federal regulatory agency that is charged by Congress with the administration and enforcement of the Act, 7 U.S.C. §§ 1-27f (2012), and the Regulations promulgated thereunder, 17 C.F.R. pts. 1-190 (2017).

 [*232]  2. Defendant CabbageTech, Corp. is a New York corporation based on Staten Island, New York. [**43]  It was incorporated on May 6, 2016. CabbageTech, Corp.'s last known address is 20 Rawson Place, Suite B, Staten Island, New York, 10314. At times, CabbageTech, Corp. did business as Coin Drop Markets (together with CabbageTech, Corp, "CDM"). CDM has never registered with the Commission.

3. Defendant Patrick K. McDonnell ("McDonnell") is a resident of Staten Island, New York. McDonnell formed, owned, and controlled CabbageTech, Corp. McDonnell has never registered with the Commission



Defendants' Fraud Involving Advice About Trading Virtual Currencies
4. Defendants solicited customers in several of the United States as well as foreign countries to become members of groups supposedly to receive Defendants' virtual currency consulting services and trading advice.

5. In April 2017, Defendants advertised membership in trading groups such as RedliteGreenLite, BTC ("RLGLBTC"), relating to Bitcoin, and RedliteGreenLite, LTC ("RLGLLTC"), relating to Litecoin. These groups purported to provide trading advice and guidance, such as entry and exit prices for day trading of virtual currencies. Defendants also solicited membership or subscription to other groups and services, such as a "Turn-Key Annual [**44]  Membership" providing access, for instance, to McDonnell's and CDM's supposed virtual currency trading expertise, mentorship, and guidance.

6. CDM's promotional materials made claims that a CDM membership in RLGLLTC would provide "real-time . . . reports [of] critical $LTC entry/exit points via @RLGLLTC 24/7 including holidays/weekends." These promotional materials further made claims that this continuous, ongoing monitoring and trading signals "afford[ed] 'minute-to-minute' price arbitrage, exploitation, and opportunities for swing trading profits." These promotional materials also made claims such as a trading group was "a dedicated team of digital asset trading specialists trend spotting."

7. These materials promised to provide the membership services on an annual basis in exchange for an up-front subscription fee. Defendants further solicited "lifetime" memberships, at a higher price, in a more exclusive trading sector that would provide greater opportunities to profit from virtual currency trading. One such opportunity purported to offer profits as much as a 300% return on an investment in less than a week. In or around May 2017, Defendants created one or more social media chatrooms, [**45]  purportedly to provide agreed-upon trading advice and services.

8. After receiving subscription payments from multiple CDM Customers, Defendants did not provide to such customers continuous, real-time trading signals, advice, or trading expertise through its social media chatrooms, through online communications such as via Twitter, or through its website. For example, Defendants never provided "real-time . . . reports [of] critical $LTC entry/exit points via @RLGLLTC 24/7 including holidays/weekends." Defendants' RLGLLTC never provided signals that "afford[ed] 'minute-to-minute' price arbitrage, exploitation, and opportunities for swing trading profits."

9. Defendants misappropriated CDM Customers' funds. By July 2017, Defendants shut down the website and chatroom, deleted social media accounts, ceased communicating with customers, and kept the customers' funds.



 [*233]  Defendant's Fraud Involving Management of Customer Investments in Virtual Currency
10. McDonnell described himself in solicitations as a "professional trader," and CDM's website included a purported example of a single virtual currency trade that had generated more than an approximately 1,000% return.

11. Instead of achieving enormous [**46]  gains on behalf of CDM Customers, once Defendants had solicited and obtained CDM Customer funds for trading by Defendants on behalf of customers, Defendants ceased communicating with the customers and misappropriated the customers' funds.

12. In or around May 2017, after being solicited by McDonnell, one CDM Customer provided Litecoin to Defendants for trading by McDonnell on the customer's behalf. McDonnell told this customer that he would use the customer's funds to trade the "volatility" of Litecoin. In fact, Defendants misappropriated this customer's funds and ultimately ceased communicating with the customer.



CDM's Controlling Person
13. McDonnell founded and created CDM, and controlled content on the CDM website and related social media. McDonnell controlled bank and virtual currency accounts to which he directed CDM Customers to send money for the purchase of CDM services and for Defendants-managed trading. McDonnell was responsible for developing and disseminating the false and misleading information about CDM to CDM Customers through CDM's solicitation materials.



B. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW Jurisdiction and Venue
14. The Court has jurisdiction over the subject matter of this action under [**47]  28 U.S.C. § 1331 (2012) and 28 U.S.C. § 1345 (2012). Section 6c(a) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1 (2012), authorizes the Commission to seek injunctive and other relief against any person whenever it shall appear to the Commission that such person has engaged, is engaging in, or is about to engage in any act or practice constituting a violation of any provision of the Act, or any rule, regulation, or order thereunder.

15. Venue properly lies in this District, pursuant to Section 6c(e) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(e) (2012), because Defendants are found in, inhabit, or transact business in this District, and because acts and practices in violation of the Act occurred within this District, among other places.



Injunctive Relief is Appropriate
16. The Commission has presented a prima facie case for the purpose of obtaining a preliminary injunction based on the fact that Defendants have engaged or are engaging in violations the Act and Commission Regulations as set forth in the Complaint.

17. The Commission has demonstrated a reasonable likelihood of future violations by the Defendants.

18. A preliminary injunction and other relief are warranted in light of the allegations set forth in the Complaint, evidence submitted at a hearing held by the court, the Commission's likelihood [**48]  of success on the merits of its claims against the Defendants, and the reasonable likelihood of future violations by the Defendants.



III. RELIEF GRANTED

A. PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:

19. Defendants, their officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns,  [*234]  and attorneys, and all persons in active concert or participation with Defendants who receive notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, are hereby restrained, enjoined, and prohibited until further order of the court, from directly or indirectly, in connection with any swap, or contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or contract for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, intentionally or recklessly:

A. using or employing, or attempting to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;

B. making, or attempting to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make statements made not untrue or misleading; and

C. engaging, or attempting to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon [**49]  any person; in violation of Section 6(c)(1) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) (2012), or Commission Regulation 180.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 180.1(a) (2017).

20. Defendants, their officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, or attorneys, and all persons in active concert or participation with Defendants who receive notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, are hereby restrained, enjoined, and prohibited until further order of the court, from directly or indirectly:

A. Trading on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, as that term is defined in Section 1a(40) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(40) (2012);

B. Entering into any transactions involving "commodity interests" (as that term is defined in Regulation 1.3(yy), 17 C.F.R. § 1.3(yy) (2017)) for their own personal account or for any account in which they have a direct or indirect interest;

C. Having any commodity interests traded on their behalf;

D. Controlling or directing the trading for or on behalf of any other person or entity, whether by power of attorney or otherwise, in any account involving commodity interests;

E. Soliciting, receiving, or accepting any funds from any person for the purpose of purchasing or selling any commodity;

F. Applying for registration or claiming exemption from registration [**50]  with the Commission in any capacity, and engaging in any activity requiring such registration or exemption from registration with the Commission, except as provided for in Regulation 4.14(a)(9), 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(9) (2017); and

G. Acting as a principal (as that term is defined in Regulation 3.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 3.1(a) (2017)), agent, or any other officer or employee of any person (as that term is defined in Section 1a(38) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(38) (2012)) registered, exempted from registration, or required to be registered with the Commission except as provided for in Regulation 4.14(a)(9), 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(9) (2017). B. MAINTENANCE OF AND ACCESS TO BUSINESS RECORDS

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that:

21. Defendants are restrained from directly or indirectly destroying, mutilating, erasing, altering, concealing or disposing of, in any manner, directly or indirectly, any documents that relate to the business practices or business or personal finances of any Defendant.

22. Any financial or brokerage institution, business entity, or person that receives  [*235]  notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, shall not:

A. directly or indirectly destroy, alter or dispose of, in any manner, any records relating to the business activities and business and personal finances [**51]  of any Defendant; and

B. deny a request by the Commission to inspect any records pertaining to any account or asset owned, controlled, managed or held by Defendants, or managed or held on behalf of, or for the benefit of, any Defendants, including, but not limited to, originals or copies of account applications, account statements, signature cards, checks, drafts, deposit tickets, transfers to and from the accounts, debit and credit instruments or slips, currency transaction reports, 1099 forms, and safe deposit box logs. As an alternative to allowing inspection of records, a financial or brokerage institution, business entity or other person may provide full un-redacted copies of records requested by the Commission. C. ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that:

23. Within five (5) business days following the service of this Order, Defendants shall submit in writing and serve upon the Commission an accounting identifying:

A. all transfers or payments of funds to them or any other entity controlled by them from any individual or entity in connection with the misconduct described in the Complaint. The identification shall include the amount of each such transfer or [**52]  payment, the date of the transfer or payment, and the name, address, account number and financial institution of the party making and the party receiving the transfer or payment;

B. in detail, the precise disposition of each such transfer or payment and any assets derived therefrom;

C. by name and address, all persons, entities and accounts currently holding funds or assets derived from such transfers or payments and the reason each received the funds or assets. The identification shall include the amount each received, the date received, the reason received, the institution and account number or location in which the funds or other assets are held and the name, address, account number and financial institution of the person or entity who provided each with the funds or other assets;

D. assets of every type and description presently owned by or held for the direct or indirect benefit, or subject to the direct or indirect control, of any Defendant, whether in the United States or elsewhere; and

E. the identification number of each account or other asset controlled, managed, or held by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of a Defendant, either individually or jointly; the balance of each such [**53]  account, or a description of the nature and value of such asset as of the close of business on the day on which this Order is served, and, if the account or other asset has been closed or removed, the date closed or removed, the total funds removed in order to close the account, and the name of the person or entity to whom such account or other asset was remitted; and the identification of any safe deposit box that is owned controlled, managed, or held by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of a Defendant, either individually or jointly, or is otherwise subject to access by Defendants.

24. Upon request by the Commission, each Defendant shall promptly provide the  [*236]  Commission with copies of all records or other documentation pertaining to any account or asset identified in response to Paragraph 23 above, including, but not limited to, originals or copies of account applications, account statements, signature cards, checks, drafts, deposit tickets, transfers to and from the accounts, all other debit and credit instruments or slips, currency transaction reports, Internal Revenue Service Forms 1099, and safe deposit box logs.



IV. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
25. Definitions. For the purposes of this [**54]  Order, the following definitions apply:

A. "Assets" means any legal or equitable interest in, right to, or claim to, any real or personal property, whether individually or jointly, directly or indirectly controlled, and wherever located, including, but not limited to: chattels, goods, instruments, equipment, fixtures, general intangibles, effects, leaseholds, mail or other deliveries, inventory, checks, notes, accounts (including, but not limited to, bank accounts and accounts at other financial institutions), credits, receivables, lines of credit, contracts (including spot, futures, options, or swaps contracts), insurance policies, and all cash, wherever located, within or outside the United States.

B. The term "document" is synonymous in meaning and equal in scope to the broad usage of the term in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 34(a).

26. Service of this Order. Copies of this Order may be served by any means, including mail, electronic mail, facsimile transmission, Fedex, and United Parcel Service, upon any financial institution or other entity or person that may have possession, custody, or control of any document or asset of Defendants, or that may be subject to any provision of this Order.

27. Bond Not Required of Plaintiff [**55] . Plaintiff is an agency of the United States, and therefore, pursuant to Section 6c(b) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. §13a-1(b) (2012), no bond is required prior to entry of this Order.

28. Continuing Jurisdiction of this Court. This Order shall remain in effect until further order of the court. The court shall retain jurisdiction over this action to ensure compliance with this Order and for all other purposes related to this action.

29. Any person claiming improper application of the injunctive power of the court may seek relief by motion.

SO ORDERED.

/s/ Jack B. Weinstein

Jack B. Weinstein

Senior United States District Judge

Dated: March 6, 2018

Brooklyn, New York



Appendix B
 [*237] 

Please note that LabCFTC cannot and will not provide legal advice. If you have specific questions regarding your activities and whether they conformto legal or regulatory requirements, you should consult with a qualified lawyer or appropriate expert. LabCFTC has no independent authority or decision-making power, and cannot independently provide, or create an expectation for, legal or regulatory relief. Communications from LabCFTC shall not create estoppel against CFTC or other enforcement actions. Any formal requests for relief must be addressed by relevant [**56]  CFTC staff or, as necessary, by the Commission. LabCFTC will work with entities on such requests with the appropriate offices through established processes.



Contents
This primer format is intended to be an educational tool regarding emerging FinTech innovations. It is not intended to describe the official policy or position of the CFTC, or to limit the CFTC's current or future positions or actions. The CFTC does not endorse the use or effectiveness of any of the financial products in this presentation. It is organized as follows:

 Overview

— What is a Virtual Currency?

— Bitcoin and Related Technologies

— Potential Uses of Virtual Currencies and Blockchain Technologies

 The Role of the CFTC

— The CFTC's Mission

— Sample Permitted and Prohibited Activities

— ICOs, Virtual Tokens, and CFTC Oversight

■ Risks of Virtual Currencies

— Operational Risks

— Speculative Risks

— Cybersecurity Risks

— Fraud and Manipulation Risks



 [*238]  OVERVIEW OF VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

What is a Virtual Currency?
 Although precise definitions offered by others are varied, an IRS definition provides us with a general idea:

— "Virtual currency is a digital representation of value that functions as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, [**57]  and/or a store of value.

— In some environments, it operates like 'real' currency . . . but it does not have legal tender status [in the U.S.].

— Virtual currency that has an equivalent value in real currency, or that acts as a substitute for real currency, is referred to as 'convertible' virtual currency. Bitcoin is one example of a convertible virtual currency.

— Bitcoin can be digitally traded between users and can be purchased for, or exchanged into, U.S. dollars, Euros, and other real or virtual currencies."†Link to the text of the note



 [*239]  What is Bitcoin?
■ Bitcoin is currently the largest convertible virtual currency by market capitalization (close to $72 billion in August 2017)†Link to the text of the note

 Bitcoin was created in 2008 by a person or group that used the name "Satoshi Nakamoto," with the belief that:

"[w]hat is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party."

 Bitcoin:

— Is "pseudonymous" (or partially anonymous) in that an individual is identified by an alpha-numeric public key/address;

— Relies on cryptography [**58]  (and unique digital signatures) for security based on public and private keys and complex mathematical algorithms;

— Runs on a decentralized peer-to-peer network of computers and "miners" that operate on open-source software and do "work" to validate and irrevocably log transactions on a permanent public distributed ledger visible to the entire network;

— Solves the lack of trust between participants who may be strangers to each other on a public ledger through the transaction validation work noted in the sub-bullet above; and

— Enables the transfer of ownership without the need for a trusted, central intermediary.



What is the Difference between Public and Private Ledger Systems?
 Certain virtual currencies operate on public distributed ledger systems that capture "blocks" of transactions — there is no inherent trust in this decentralized system.

— Virtual currencies create an economic incentive for dispersed, independent, computers, or groups of computers, around the world to confirm transactions and perform verifiable "work" (that creates consensus) to publish a new block of transactions on the public ledger in exchange for a payment of the applicable virtual currency.

 Private / permissioned [**59]  distributed ledger networks typically have some degree of trust between participants.

— Private ledger systems allow a network of known participants to share transaction information between themselves more efficiently.

— While cryptography and consensus may still be involved in private ledger systems, these systems do not necessarily involve a virtual currency that may serve as the economic incentive for miner or validator participation in public networks.



 [*240]  Sample Potential Use Cases of Virtual Currencies
■ Store of Value

— Like precious metals, many virtual currencies are a "non-yielding" asset (meaning they do not pay dividends or interest), but they may be more fungible, divisible, and portable

— Limited or finite supply of virtual currencies may contrast with 'real' (fiat) currencies

 Trading

— Trading in virtual currencies may result in capital gains or losses

— Note that trading in virtual currencies may involve significant speculation and volatility risk (see Virtual Currency Risks section below)

 Payments and Transactions

— Some merchants and online stores are accepting virtual currencies in exchange for physical and digital goods (i.e., payments)

— Some public Blockchain systems rely [**60]  on the payment of fees in virtual currency form in order to power the network and underlying transactions

 Transfer / Move Money

— Domestic and international money transfer (e.g., remittances) in order to increase efficiencies and potentially reduce related fees



Sample Potential Use Cases of Blockchain/DLT Technology
Blockchain, or distributed ledger technology,*Link to the text of the note underpins many virtual currencies, but can also be used within private, permissioned ledger systems — versions of public and private systems may be used by:

 Financial Institutions

— Trading & Payment Platforms / Clearing and Settlement

— Regulatory Reporting, Compliance & Audit

— Know Your Customer (KYC) / Anti-Money Laundering (AML)

— Repurchase Agreement Transactions ("Repos," i.e., short-term borrowing of securities)

 Governments

— General Records Management

— Title & Ownership Records Management (e.g., real property deeds and title transfer)

— Regulatory Reporting and Oversight

■ Cross-Industry

— Smart Contracts (i.e., self executing agreements)

— Resource / Asset Sharing Agreements (e.g., allowing rental of a personal car left behind during a vacation or allowing rental of excess computer or [**61]  data storage)

— Digital Identity (e.g., proof of identity when entering into a contract)



 [*241]  THE ROLE OF THE CFTC

The CFTC's Mission
 The mission of the CFTC is to foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound markets. By working to avoid systemic risk, the Commission aims to protect market users and their funds, consumers, and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to derivatives and other products that are subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).

 To foster the public interest and fulfill its mission, the CFTC will act:

— To deter and prevent price manipulation or any other disruptions to market integrity;

— To ensure the financial integrity of all transactions subject to the CEA and theavoidance of systemic risk;

— To protect all market participants from fraudulent or other abusive sales practices andmisuse of customer assets; and

— To promote responsible innovation and fair competition among boards of trade, othermarkets, and market participants.

 Responsible innovation is market-enhancing.



 [*242]  Virtual Currencies are Commodities
 The definition of "commodity" in the CEA is broad.

— It can mean a physical commodity, such as an agricultural product (e.g., [**62]  wheat, cotton) or natural resource (e.g., gold, oil).

— It can mean a currency or interest rate.

— The CEA definition of "commodity" also includes "all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in."

 The CFTC first found that Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are properly defined as commodities in 2015.‡Link to the text of the note

 The CFTC has oversight over futures, options, and derivatives contracts.

 The CFTC's jurisdiction is implicated when a virtual currency is used in a derivatives contract, or if there is fraud or manipulation involving a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce.

— Beyond instances of fraud or manipulation, the CFTC generally does not oversee "spot" or cash market exchanges and transactions involving virtual currencies that do not utilize margin, leverage, or financing.



Examples of Permitted Activities
 TeraExchange, LLC, a Swap Execution Facility ("SEF") registered with the CFTC, entered in to the virtual currency market in 2014 by listing a Bitcoin swap for trading. Trading on a SEF platform is limited to "eligible contract participants," a type of sophisticated trader, which includes various financial institutions [**63]  and persons, with assets above specified statutory minimums.

 North American Derivatives Exchange Inc. ("NADEX"), a designated contract market ("DCM"), listed binary options based on the Tera Bitcoin Price Index from November 2014 to December 2016. Retail customers may trade on NADEX.

■ LedgerX, LLC ("LedgerX") registered with the CFTC as a SEF and Derivative Clearing Organization ("DCO") in July 2017. It plans to list digital currency options.



 [*243]  Examples of Prohibited Activities‡Link to the text of the note
 Price manipulation of a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce.

 Pre-arranged or wash trading in an exchange-traded virtual currency swap or futures contract.

 A virtual currency futures or option contract or swap traded on a domestic platform or facility that has not registered with the CFTC as a SEF or DCM.

 Certain schemes involving virtual currency marketed to retail customers, such as off-exchange financed commodity transactions with persons who fail to register with the CFTC.



ICOs, Virtual Tokens, and CFTC Oversight The Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") recently released a report about an Initial Coin Offering or "ICO" (the "DAO Report").‡Link to the text of the note

 The DAO Report explains that "The DAO" is an example [**64]  of a "Decentralized Autonomous Organization," which is a "virtual" organization embodied in computer code and executed on a distributed ledger or blockchain.

 Investors exchanged Ether, a virtual currency, for virtual DAO "Tokens" to fund projects in which the investors would share in anticipated earnings. DAO Tokens could be resold on web-based platforms.

 Based on the facts and circumstances, the SEC determined that DAO Tokens are "securities" under the federal securities laws.

 There is no inconsistency between the SEC's analysis and the CFTC's determination that virtual currencies are commodities and that virtual tokens may be commodities or derivatives contracts depending on the particular facts and circumstances.

— The CFTC looks beyond form and considers the actual substance and purpose of an activity when applying the federal commodities laws and CFTC regulations



 [*244]  RISKS OF VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

Virtual Currencies Have Risks
 While virtual currencies have potential benefits, this emerging space also involves various risks, including:

— Operational Risks

— Cybersecurity Risks

— Speculative Risks

— Fraud and Manipulation Risks

 Virtual currencies are relatively unproven and may not perform [**65]  as expected (for example, some have questioned whether public distributed ledgers are in fact immutable).
 Investors and users of virtual currencies should educate themselves about these and other risks before getting involved.



 [*245]  Virtual Currency: Operational Risk
 Conduct extensive research before giving any money or personal information to a virtual currency platform.

 The virtual currency marketplace is comprised of many different platforms where you can convert one type of virtual currency into another or into real currency, if offered.

 Many of these platforms are not subject to the supervision which applies to regulated exchanges. For example, if they engage in only certain spot or cash market transactions and do not utilize margin, leverage, or financing, they may be subject to federal and state money transmission and anti-money laundering laws, but they do not have to follow all the rules that regulated exchanges operate under.

Some virtual currency platforms may be missing critical system safeguards and customer protection related systems; without adequate safeguards, customers may lose some or all of their virtual assets.



Virtual Currency: Cybersecurity Risk
 Keep your property [**66]  in safe accounts and carefully verify digital wallet addresses.

 Some platforms may "commingle" (mix) customer assets in shared accounts (at a bank for real currency or a digital wallet for virtual currency). This may affect whether or how you can withdraw your currency.

 Depending on the structure and security of the digital wallet, some may be vulnerable to hacks, resulting in the theft of virtual currency or loss of customer assets.

— If a bad actor gains access to your private key, it can take your virtual currency with limited or no recourse

 When transferring virtual currency, be sure to confirm the destination wallet address, even when using "copy and paste." It is possible for hackers to change digital wallet addresses on your computer.



 [*246]  Virtual Currency: Speculative Risk
 Only invest what you are willing and able to lose.

 The virtual currency marketplace has been subject to substantial volatility and price swings.

 An individual or coordinated group trading a large amount of virtual currency at once could affect the price, depending on the overall amount of trading in the marketplace.

 Periods of high volatility with inadequate trade volume may create adverse market conditions, [**67]  leading to harmful effects such as customer orders being filled at undesirable prices.

 Some advertisements promise guaranteed returns — this can be a common tactic with fraudulent schemes.



Virtual Currency: Fraud & Manipulation Risk
 Carefully research the platform you want to use, and pay close attention to the fee structure and systems safeguards.

 Unregistered virtual currency platforms may not be able to adequately protect against market abuses by other traders.

— For example, recent news articles discuss potential "spoofing" activity and other manipulative behavior that can negatively affect prices

 Some virtual currency platforms may be selling you virtual currency directly from their own account — these types of transactions may give the platform unfair advantages and sometimes resemble fraudulent "bucket shop" schemes.

 There is also a risk of Ponzi schemers and fraudsters seeking to capitalize on the current attention focused on virtual currencies.



 [*247]  Appendix C
WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF

J. CHRISTOPHER GIANCARLO

CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

BEFORE THE

SENATE BANKING COMMITTEE

WASHINGTON, D.C.

FEBRUARY 6, 2018

Introduction: Virtual Currency

Thank you, Chairman Crapo, for the [**68]  invitation to testify before the Committee. Thank you, Ranking Member Brown, and all the members of the Committee for this opportunity to discuss virtual currencies.

At the outset, I would like to note that this hearing is timely, even fortuitous. Emerging financial technologies broadly are taking us into a new chapter of economic history. They are impacting trading, markets and the entire financial landscape with far ranging implications for capital formation and risk transfer. They include machine learning and artificial intelligence, algorithm-based trading, data analytics, "smart" contracts valuing themselves and calculating payments in real-time, and distributed ledger technologies, which over time may come to challenge traditional market infrastructure. They are transforming the world around us, and it is no surprise that these technologies are having an equally transformative impact on US capital and derivatives markets.

The more specific topic for today's hearing, however, is virtual currency. Broadly speaking, virtual currencies are a digital representation of value that may function as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, and/or a store of value. Virtual currencies generally [**69]  run on a decentralized peer-to-peer network of computers, which rely on certain network participants to validate and log transactions on a permanent, public distributed ledger, commonly known as the blockchain.

Supporters of virtual currencies see a technological solution to the age-old "double spend" problem — that has always driven the need for a trusted, central authority to ensure that an entity is capable of, and does, engage in a valid transaction. Traditionally, there has been a need for a trusted intermediary — for example a bank or other financial institution — to serve as a gatekeeper for transactions and many economic activities. Virtual currencies seek to replace the need for a central authority or intermediary with a decentralized, rules-based and open consensus mechanism.1Link to the text of the note An array of thoughtful business, technology, academic, and policy leaders have  [*248]  extrapolated some of the possible impacts that derive from such an innovation, including how market participants conduct transactions, transfer ownership, and power peer-to-peer applications and economic systems.2Link to the text of the note

Others, however, argue that this is all hype or technological alchemy and that the current interest in virtual currencies is overblown and resembles wishful thinking, a fever, even a mania. They have declared the 2017 heightened valuation of Bitcoin to be a bubble similar to the famous "Tulip Bubble" of the seventeenth century. They say that virtual currencies perform no socially useful function and, worse, can be used to evade laws or support illicit activity.3Link to the text of the note Indeed, history has demonstrated to us time-and-again that bad actors will try to invoke the concept of innovation in order to perpetrate age-old fraudulent schemes on the public. Accordingly, some assert that virtual currencies should be banned, as some nations have done.4Link to the text of the note

There is clearly no shortage of opinions on virtual currencies such as Bitcoin. In fact, virtual currencies may be all things to all people: for some, potential riches, the next big thing, a technological revolution, and an exorable value proposition; for others, a fraud, [**71]  a new form of temptation and allure, and a way to separate the unsuspecting from their money.

Perspective is critically important. As of the morning of February 5, the total value of all outstanding Bitcoin was about $130 billion based on a Bitcoin price of $7,700. The Bitcoin "market capitalization" is less than the stock market capitalization of a single "large cap" business, such as McDonalds (around $130 billion). The total value of all outstanding virtual currencies was about $365 billion. Because virtual currencies like Bitcoin are sometimes considered to be comparable to gold as an investment vehicle, it is important to recognize that the total value of all the gold in the world is estimated by the World Gold Council to be about $8 trillion which continues to dwarf the virtual currency market size. Clearly, the column inches of press attention to virtual currency far surpass its size and magnitude in today's global economy.

 [*249]  Yet, despite being a relatively small asset class, virtual currency presents novel challenges for regulators. SEC Chairman Clayton and I recently wrote:

The CFTC and SEC, along with other federal and state regulators and criminal authorities, will continue to [**72]  work together to bring transparency and integrity to these markets and, importantly, to deter and prosecute fraud and abuse. These markets are new, evolving and international. As such they require us to be nimble and forward-looking; coordinated with our state, federal and international colleagues; and engaged with important stakeholders, including Congress5Link to the text of the note.

It is this perspective that has guided our work at the CFTC on virtual currencies.

Introduction: The Mission of the CFTC:

The mission of the CFTC is to foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound derivatives markets.6Link to the text of the note By working to avoid systemic risk, the Commission aims to protect market users and their funds, consumers, and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to derivatives and other products that are subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).

The CFTC was established as an independent agency in 1974, assuming responsibilities that had previously belonged to the Department of Agriculture since the 1920s. The Commission historically has been charged by the [**73]  CEA with regulatory authority over the commodity futures markets. These markets have existed since the 1860s, beginning with agricultural commodities such as wheat, corn, and cotton.

Over time, these organized commodity futures markets, known as designated contract markets (DCMs) regulated by the CFTC, have grown to include those for energy and metals commodities, collectively including crude oil, heating oil, gasoline, copper, gold, and silver. The agency now also oversees these commodity futures markets for financial products such as interest rates, stock indexes, and foreign currency. The definition of "commodity" in the CEA is broad. It can mean a physical commodity, such as an agricultural product (e.g., wheat, cotton) or natural resource (e.g., gold, oil). It can mean a currency or interest rate. The CEA definition of "commodity" also includes "all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in."

In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, President Obama and Congress enhanced the CFTC's regulatory authority. With passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and  [*250]  Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), the [**74]  agency now also oversees most of the U.S. swaps market in addition to exchange traded futures markets.

Futures, swaps and other derivatives markets are essential means for commercial and financial risk mitigation and transfer. These markets allow the risks of variable production costs, such as the price of raw materials, energy, foreign currency and interest rates, to be transferred from those who cannot afford them to those who can. They are the reason why American consumers enjoy stable prices in the grocery store, whatever the conditions out on the farm.

But derivatives markets are not just useful for agricultural producers. They impact the price and availability of heating in American homes, the energy used in factories, the interest rates borrowers pay on home mortgages and the returns workers earn on their retirement savings. More than 90 percent of Fortune 500 companies use derivatives to manage commercial or market risk in their worldwide business operations. In short, derivatives serve the needs of society to help moderate price, supply and other commercial risks to free up capital for economic growth, job creation and prosperity.

To ensure the integrity of US derivatives markets, [**75]  the CFTC regulates derivatives market participants and activities. The agency oversees a variety of individuals and organizations. These include swap execution facilities, derivatives clearing organizations, designated contract markets, swap data repositories, swap dealers, futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators, and other entities. The CFTC also prosecutes derivative market fraud and manipulation, including misconduct in underlying spot markets for commodities.



I. CFTC Authority and Oversight over Virtual Currencies
In 2015, the CFTC determined that virtual currencies, such as Bitcoin, met the definition of "commodity" under the CEA. Nevertheless, the CFTC does NOT have regulatory jurisdiction under the CEA over markets or platforms conducting cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies or other commodities or over participants on such platforms. More specifically, the CFTC does not have authority to conduct regulatory oversight over spot virtual currency platforms or other cash commodities, including imposing registration requirements, surveillance and monitoring, transaction reporting, compliance with personnel conduct standards, customer education, capital adequacy, [**76]  trading system safeguards, cyber security examinations or other requirements. In fact, current law does not provide any U.S. Federal regulator with such regulatory oversight authority over spot virtual currency platforms operating in the United States or abroad. However, the CFTC DOES have enforcement jurisdiction to investigate through subpoena and other investigative powers and, as appropriate, conduct civil enforcement action against fraud and manipulation in virtual currency derivatives markets and in underlying virtual currency spot markets.

In contrast to the spot markets, the CFTC does have both regulatory and enforcement jurisdiction under the CEA over derivatives on virtual currencies traded in the United States. This means that for derivatives on virtual currencies traded in U.S. markets, the CFTC conducts  [*251]  comprehensive regulatory oversight, including imposing registration requirements and compliance with a full range of requirements for trade practice and market surveillance, reporting and monitoring and standards for conduct, capital requirements and platform and system safeguards.



II. Assertion of CFTC Authority
The CFTC has been straightforward in asserting its area of statutory [**77]  jurisdiction concerning virtual currencies derivatives. As early as 2014, former CFTC Chairman Timothy Massad discussed virtual currencies and potential CFTC oversight under the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).7Link to the text of the note And as noted above, in 2015, the CFTC found virtual currencies to be a commodity.8Link to the text of the note In that year, the agency took enforcement action to prohibit wash trading and prearranged trades on a virtual currency derivatives platform.9Link to the text of the note In 2016, the CFTC took action against a Bitcoin futures exchange operating in the U.S. that failed to register with the agency.10Link to the text of the note Last year, the CFTC issued proposed guidance on what is a derivative market and what is a spot market in the virtual currency context.11Link to the text of the note The agency also issued warnings about valuations and volatility in spot virtual currency markets12Link to the text of the note and launched an unprecedented consumer education effort (detailed in Section IV herein).



a. Enforcement
The CFTC Division of Enforcement is a premier Federal civil enforcement agency dedicated to deterring and preventing price manipulation and other disruptions of market integrity, ensuring the financial integrity of all transactions subject to the CEA, and protecting market participants from [**78]  fraudulent or other abusive sales practices and misuse of customer assets. Appendix A hereto summarizes recent CFTC enforcement activities.

The CFTC has been particularly assertive of its enforcement jurisdiction over virtual currencies. It has formed an internal virtual currency enforcement task force to garner and deploy relevant expertise in this evolving asset class. The task force shares information and works cooperatively with counterparts at the SEC with similar virtual currency expertise.

 [*252]  In September 2017, the CFTC took enforcement action against a virtual currency Ponzi scheme.13Link to the text of the note Over the past few weeks, the CFTC filed a series of civil enforcement actions against perpetrators of fraud, market manipulation and disruptive trading involving virtual currency. These include:

(i) My Big Coin Pay Inc., which charged the defendants with commodity fraud and misappropriation related to the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin;

(ii) The Entrepreneurs Headquarters Limited, which charged the defendants with a fraudulent scheme to solicit Bitcoin from members of the public, misrepresenting that customers' funds would be pooled and invested in products [**79]  including binary options, and instead misappropriated the funds and failed to register as a Commodity Pool Operator; and

(iii) Coin Drop Markets, which charged the defendants with fraud and misappropriation in connection with purchases and trading of Bitcoin and Litecoin.

These recent enforcement actions confirm that the CFTC, working closely with the SEC and other fellow financial enforcement agencies, will aggressively prosecute bad actors that engage in fraud and manipulation regarding virtual currencies.



b. Bitcoin Futures
It is important to put the new Bitcoin futures market in perspective. It is quite small with open interest at the CME of 6,695 bitcoin14Link to the text of the note and at Cboe Futures Exchange (Cboe) of 6,695 bitcoin (as of Feb. 2, 2018). At a price of approximately $7,700 per Bitcoin,15Link to the text of the note this represents a notional amount of about $94 million. In comparison, the notional amount of the open interest in CME's WTI crude oil futures was more than one thousand times greater, about $170 billion (2,600,000 contracts) as of Feb 2, 2018 and the notional amount represented by the open interest of Comex gold futures was about $74 billion (549,000 contracts).

Prior to the launch of Bitcoin futures, the CFTC [**80]  closely observed the evolution of virtual currencies over the past several years. One exchange, CME Group, launched a Bitcoin Reference Rate in November 2016. And, another exchange, CBOE Futures Exchange (Cboe), first approached the CFTC in July 2017. The CFTC anticipated receiving proposals for the launch of Bitcoin futures products in late 2017.

 [*253]  Under CEA and Commission regulations and related guidance, futures exchanges may self-certify new products on twenty-four hour notice prior to trading. In the past decade and a half, over 12,000 new futures products have been self-certified.16Link to the text of the note It is clear that Congress and prior Commissions deliberately designed the product self-certification framework to give futures exchanges, in their role as self-regulatory organizations, the ability to quickly bring new products to the marketplace. The CFTC's current product self-certification framework has long been considered to function well and be consistent with public policy that encourages market-driven innovation that has made America's listed futures markets the envy of the world.

Practically, both CME and Cboe had numerous discussions and exchanged numerous draft product terms and conditions [**81]  with CFTC staff over a course of months prior to their certifying and launching Bitcoin futures in December 2017. This type of lengthy engagement is not unusual during the self-certification process for products that may raise certain issues. The CFTC staff undertook its review of CME's and Cboe's Bitcoin futures products with considered attention. Given the emerging nature and heightened attention of these products, staff conducted a "heightened review" of CME's and Cboe's responsibilities under the CEA and Commission regulations to ensure that their Bitcoin futures products and their cash-settlement processes were not readily susceptible to manipulation,17Link to the text of the note and the risk management of the associated Derivatives Clearing Organizations (DCOs) to ensure that the products were sufficiently margined.18Link to the text of the note

Staff obtained the voluntary cooperation of CME and Cboe with a set of enhanced monitoring and risk management steps.

1. Designated contract markets (DCMs) setting exchange large trader reporting thresholds at five bitcoins or less;

2. DCMs entering direct or indirect information sharing agreements with spot market platforms to allow access to trade and trader data making up the underlying index [**82]  that the futures contracts settle to;

3. DCMs agreeing to engage in monitoring of underlying index data from cash markets and identifying anomalies and disproportionate moves;

4. DCMs agreeing to conduct inquiries, as appropriate, including at the trade settlement and trader level when anomalies or disproportionate moves are identified;

5. DCMs agreeing to regular communication with CFTC surveillance staff on trade activities, including providing trade settlement and trader data upon request;

 [*254]  6. DCMs agreeing to coordinate product launches to enable the CFTC's market surveillance branch to monitor developments; and

7. DCOs setting substantially high initial19Link to the text of the note and maintenance margin for cash-settled instruments.

The first six of these elements were used to ensure that the new product offerings complied with the DCM's obligations under the CEA core principles and CFTC regulations and related guidance. The seventh element, setting high initial and maintenance margins, was designed to ensure adequate collateral coverage in reaction to the underlying volatility of Bitcoin.

In crafting its process of "heightened review" for compliance, CFTC staff prioritized visibility, data, and monitoring of markets [**83]  for Bitcoin derivatives and underlying settlement reference rates. CFTC staff felt that in gaining such visibility, the CFTC could best look out for Bitcoin market participants and consumers, as well as the public interest in Federal surveillance and enforcement. This visibility greatly enhances the agency's ability to prosecute fraud and manipulation in both the new Bitcoin futures markets and in its related underlying cash markets.

As for the interests of clearing members, the CFTC recognized that large global banks and brokerages that are DCO clearing members are able to look after their own commercial interests by choosing not to trade Bitcoin futures, as some have done, requiring substantially higher initial margins from their customers, as many have done, and through their active participation in DCO risk committees.

After the launch of Bitcoin futures, some criticism was directed at the self-certification process from a few market participants. Some questioned why the Commission did not hold public hearings prior to launch. However, it is the function of the futures exchanges and futures clearinghouses - and not CFTC staff20Link to the text of the note - to solicit and address stakeholder concerns in new product [**84]  self-certifications. The CFTC staff's focus was on how the futures contracts and cash settlement indices are designed to bar manipulation and the appropriate level of contract margining to meet CEA and Commission regulations.

Interested parties, especially clearing members, should indeed have an opportunity to raise appropriate concerns for consideration by regulated platforms proposing virtual currency derivatives and DCOs considering clearing new virtual currency products. That is why CFTC staff has added an additional element to the Review and Compliance Checklist for virtual  [*255]  currency product self-certifications. That is, requesting DCMs and SEFs to disclose to CFTC staff what steps they have taken in their capacity as self-regulatory organizations to gather and accommodate appropriate input from concerned parties, including trading firms and FCMs. Further, CFTC staff will take a close look at DCO governance around the clearing of new virtual currency products and formulate recommendations for possible further action.

The CFTC's response to the self-certification of Bitcoin futures has been a balanced one. It has resulted in the world's first federally regulated Bitcoin [**85]  futures market. Had it even been possible, blocking self-certification would not have stopped the rise of Bitcoin or other virtual currencies. Instead, it would have ensured that virtual currency spot markets continue to operate without effective and data-enabled federal regulatory surveillance for fraud and manipulation. It would have prevented the development of a regulated derivatives market that allowed participants to take "short" positions that challenged the 2017 rise of Bitcoin prices.



III. Adequacy of CFTC Authority
The CFTC has sufficient authority under the CEA to protect investors in virtual currency derivatives over which the CFTC has regulatory jurisdiction under the CEA. As noted above, the CFTC does NOT have regulatory jurisdiction over markets or platforms conducting cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies or over participants on those platforms. For such virtual currency spot markets, CFTC only has enforcement jurisdiction to investigate and, as appropriate, conduct civil enforcement action against fraud and manipulation.

Any extension of the CFTC's regulatory authority to virtual currency spot markets would require statutory amendment of the CEA.21Link to the text of the note The CFTC [**86]  is an experienced regulator of derivatives markets that mostly serve professional and eligible contract participants. Such extension of regulatory authority would be a dramatic expansion of the CFTC's regulatory mission, which currently does not give the CFTC regulatory authority (distinct from enforcement authority) over cash commodity markets.



IV. Educating Investors and Market Participants
The CFTC believes that the responsible regulatory response to virtual currencies must start with consumer education. Amidst the wild assertions, bold headlines, and shocking hyperbole about virtual currencies, there is a need for much greater understanding and clarity.

 [*256]  Over the past six months, the CFTC has produced an unprecedented amount of consumer information concerning virtual currencies (listed in Appendix B hereto). These consumer materials include an information "primer" on virtual currencies (Appendix C hereto), consumer and market advisories on investing in Bitcoin and other virtual currencies (Appendix D hereto), a dedicated CFTC "Bitcoin" webpage, several podcasts (available on the Commission's website and from various streaming services) concerning virtual currencies and underlying [**87]  technology, weekly publication of Bitcoin futures "Commitment of Traders" data and an analysis of Bitcoin spot market data.

In addition, the CFTC's Office of Consumer Education and Outreach (OCEO) is actively engaging with responsible outside partners to better educate consumers on Bitcoin and other virtual currencies. The OCEO is currently partnering with:

• The Consumer Finance Protection Bureau (CFPB) to train US public library staff to identify and report consumer in virtual currencies;

• the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) to distribute a virtual currency "Watchdog Alert" to 120,000 AARP members;

• North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) Investor Educators, who are responsible for conducting outreach to the public on avoiding investment fraud, including in virtual currencies;

• the National Attorneys General Training and Research Institute (NAGTRI), which is the research and training arm of the National Association of Attorneys General (NAAG), to inform State AGs about the availability of CFTC's virtual currency resources; and

• The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago to help consumers manage their finances better, OCEO will again coordinate with NFA, [**88]  FINRA and SEC to hold a webinar on fraud prevention in virtual currencies.



V. Interagency Coordination
As noted, the CFTC's enforcement jurisdiction over virtual currencies is not exclusive. As a result, the U.S. approach to oversight of virtual currencies has evolved into a multifaceted, multi-regulatory approach that includes:

• The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) taking increasingly strong action against unregistered securities offerings, whether they are called a virtual currency or initial coin offering in name.

• State Banking regulators overseeing certain US and foreign virtual currency spot exchanges largely through state money transfer laws.

• The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) treating virtual currencies as property subject to capital gains tax.

 [*257]  The Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) monitoring Bitcoin and other virtual currency transfers for anti-money laundering purposes.

The CFTC actively communicates its approach to virtual currencies with other Federal regulators, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Justice Department and through the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), chaired by the Treasury Department. The [**89]  CFTC has been in close communication with the SEC with respect to policy and jurisdictional considerations, especially in connection with recent virtual currency enforcement cases. In addition, we have been in communication with overseas regulatory counterparts through bilateral discussions and in meetings of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).



VI. Potential Benefits
I have spoken publicly about the potential benefits of the technology underlying Bitcoin, namely Blockchain or distributed ledger technology (DLT).22Link to the text of the note Distributed ledgers — in various open system or private network applications — have the potential to enhance economic efficiency, mitigate centralized systemic risk, defend against fraudulent activity and improve data quality and governance.23Link to the text of the note

DLT is likely to have a broad and lasting impact on global financial markets in payments, banking, securities settlement, title recording, cyber security and trade reporting and analysis.24Link to the text of the note When tied to virtual currencies, this technology aims to serve [**90]  as a new store of value, facilitate secure payments, enable asset transfers, and power new applications.

Additionally, DLT will likely develop hand-in-hand with new "smart" contracts that can value themselves in real-time, report themselves to data repositories, automatically calculate and perform margin payments and even terminate themselves in the event of counterparty default.25Link to the text of the note

DLT may enable financial market participants to manage the significant operational,  [*258]  transactional and capital complexities brought about by the many mandates, regulations and capital requirements promulgated by regulators here and abroad in the wake of the financial crisis.26Link to the text of the note In fact, one study estimates that DLT could eventually allow financial institutions to save as much as $20 billion in infrastructure and operational costs each year.27Link to the text of the note Another study reportedly estimates that blockchain could cut trading settlement [**91]  costs by a third, or $16 billion a year, and cut capital requirements by $120 billion.28Link to the text of the note Moving from systems-of-record at the level of a firm to an authoritative system-of-record at the level of a market is an enormous opportunity to improve existing market infrastructure.29Link to the text of the note

Outside of the financial services industry, many use cases for DLT are being posited from international trade to charitable endeavors and social services. International agricultural commodities merchant, Louis Dreyfus, and a group of financing banks have just completed the first agricultural deal using distributed ledger technology for the sale of 60,000 tons of US soybeans to China.30Link to the text of the note Other DLT use cases include: legal records management, inventory control and logistics, charitable donation tracking and confirmation; voting security and human refugee identification and relocation.31Link to the text of the note

Yet, while DLT promises enormous benefits to commercial firms and charities, it also promises [**92]  assistance to financial market regulators in meeting their mission to oversee healthy markets and mitigate financial risk. What a difference it would have made on the eve of the financial crisis in 2008 if regulators had access to the real-time trading ledgers of large Wall Street banks, rather than trying to assemble piecemeal data to recreate complex, individual trading portfolios. I have previously speculated32Link to the text of the note that, if regulators in 2008 could have viewed a real-time distributed ledger (or a series of aggregated ledgers across asset classes) and, perhaps, been able to utilize modern cognitive computing capabilities, they may have been able to recognize anomalies in market-wide trading activity and diverging counterparty exposures indicating heightened risk of bank failure. Such transparency may not, by itself, have saved Lehman Brothers from bankruptcy, but it certainly would have allowed for far prompter, better-informed, and more calibrated regulatory intervention instead of the disorganized response that unfortunately ensued.



 [*259]  VII. Policy Considerations
Two decades ago, as the Internet was entering a phase of rapid growth and expansion, a Republican Congress and the Clinton [**93]  administration established a set of enlightened foundational principles: the Internet was to progress through human social interaction; voluntary contractual relations and free markets; and governments and regulators were to act in a thoughtful manner not to harm the Internet's continuing evolution.33Link to the text of the note

This simple approach is well-recognized as the enlightened regulatory underpinning of the Internet that brought about such profound changes to human society. During the almost 20 years of "do no harm" regulation, a massive amount of investment was made in the Internet's infrastructure. It yielded a rapid expansion in access that supported swift deployment and mass adoption of Internet-based technologies. Internet-based innovations have revolutionized nearly every aspect of American life, from telecommunications to commerce, transportation and research and development. This robust Internet economy has created jobs, increased productivity and fostered innovation and consumer choice.

"Do no harm" was unquestionably the right approach to development of the Internet. Similarly, I believe that "do no harm" is the right overarching approach for distributed ledger technology.

Virtual currencies, [**94]  however, likely require more attentive regulatory oversight in key areas, especially to the extent that retail investors are attracted to this space. SEC Chairman Clayton and I recently stated in a joint op-ed, that:

"Our task, as market regulators, is to set and enforce rules that foster innovation while promoting market integrity and confidence. In recent months, we have seen a wide range of market participants, including retail investors, seeking to invest in DLT initiatives, including through cryptocurrencies and so-called ICOs—initial coin offerings. Experience tells us that while some market participants may make fortunes, the risks to all investors are high. Caution is merited.

"A key issue before market regulators is whether our historic approach to the regulation of currency transactions is appropriate for the cryptocurrency markets. Check-cashing and money-transmission services that operate in the U.S. are primarily state-regulated. Many of the internet-based cryptocurrency trading platforms have registered as payment services and are not subject to  [*260]  direct oversight by the SEC or the CFTC. We would support policy efforts to revisit these frameworks and ensure they are effective [**95]  and efficient for the digital era."34Link to the text of the note

As the Senate Banking Committee, the Senate Agriculture Committee and other Congressional policy makers consider the current state of regulatory oversight of cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies and trading platforms, consideration should be given to shortcomings of the current approach of state-by-state money transmitter licensure that leaves gaps in protection for virtual currency traders and investors. Any proposed Federal regulation of virtual currency platforms should be carefully tailored to the risks posed by relevant trading activity and enhancing efforts to prosecute fraud and manipulation. Appropriate Federal oversight may include: data reporting, capital requirements, cyber security standards, measures to prevent fraud and price manipulation and anti-money laundering and "know your customer" protections. Overall, a rationalized federal framework may be more effective and efficient in ensuring the integrity of the underlying market.



Conclusion
We are entering a new digital era in world financial markets. As we saw with the development of the Internet, we cannot put the technology genie back in the bottle. Virtual currencies [**96]  mark a paradigm shift in how we think about payments, traditional financial processes, and engaging in economic activity. Ignoring these developments will not make them go away, nor is it a responsible regulatory response. The evolution of these assets, their volatility, and the interest they attract from a rising global millennial population demand serious examination.

With the proper balance of sound policy, regulatory oversight and private sector innovation, new technologies will allow American markets to evolve in responsible ways and continue to grow our economy and increase prosperity. This hearing is an important part of finding that balance.

Thank you for inviting me to participate.



Appendix A

 [*261]  CFTC Enforcement Activities: Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 Year Through the Present

Overview of FY 2017
In the fiscal year that ended September 30, 2017, the CFTC brought 49 enforcement-related actions, which included significant actions to root out manipulation and spoofing and to protect retail investors from fraud. The CFTC also pursued significant and complex litigation, including cases charging manipulation, spoofing, and unlawful use of customer funds. The CFTC obtained orders totaling $412,726,307 [**97]  in restitution, disgorgement and penalties. Specifically, in the fiscal year, the CFTC obtained $333,830,145 in civil monetary penalties and $78,896,162 million in restitution and disgorgement orders. Of the civil monetary penalties imposed, the CFTC collected and deposited at the U.S. Treasury more than $265 million.



Retail Fraud
The CFTC brought a significant number of retail fraud actions in FY 2017 (20 out of the 49). For example, in February 2017, the CFTC filed and settled charges against Forex Capital Markets LLC for $7 million for defrauding retail foreign exchange customers over a five year time period by concealing its relationship with its most important market maker and misrepresenting that its platform had no conflicts of interests with its customers. That month the CFTC also brought an action charging Carlos Javier Ramirez, Gold Chasers, Inc., and Royal Leisure International, Inc. with misappropriating millions in customer funds and engaging in fraudulent sales solicitations in connection with a Ponzi scheme involving the purported purchase of physical gold.

In May 2017, the CFTC filed charges against an individual and his company with defrauding 40 investors out of at least [**98]  $13 million in connection with a commodity pool they operated; investors included family members and members of his church. In June 2017, the CFTC filed charges against two individuals and their company with fraudulently soliciting customers, including at a church gathering, and defrauding them out of more than $11 million. The pair was also arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) on related criminal charges.

In September 2017, the CFTC filed one of the largest precious metals fraud cases in the history of the Commission. As alleged, the Defendants defrauded thousands of retail customers—many of whom are elderly—out of hundreds of millions of dollars as part of a multi-year scheme in connection with illegal, off-exchange leveraged precious metal transactions.



Market Manipulation
In February 2017, the CFTC settled with RBS for $85 million for attempted manipulation of ISDAFIX, a leading global benchmark for interest rate swaps and related derivatives. The CFTC  [*262]  also brought actions against The Royal Bank of Scotland plc and Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and Goldman, Sachs & Co. for attempted manipulation of the ISDAFIX, resulting in $85 million and $120 million in penalties, respectively.   In February 2018, the CFTC settled with Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. for $70 million for attempted manipulation of ISDAFIX.

Since 2012, the CFTC has imposed over $5 billion in penalties against banks and brokers with respect to benchmark manipulation settlements.



Disruptive Trading
In November 2016, the CFTC entered into a consent order with Navinder Singh Sarao and Nav Sarao Futures Limited PLC to settle allegations related to the 2010 flash crash for $25.7 million in monetary sanctions, $12.9 million in disgorgement, and a permanent trading and registration ban. In December 2016, the CFTC settled with trading company 3Red and trader Igor Oystacher imposing a $2.5 million penalty, a monitor for three years, and requiring the use of certain trading compliance tools for intentionally and repeatedly engaging in a manipulative and deceptive spoofing scheme while placing orders for and trading futures contracts on multiple registered entities.

In January 2017, the CFTC fined Citigroup $25 million for failing to diligently supervise the activities of its employees and agents in conjunction with spoofing orders in the U.S. Treasury futures markets. Later that year, in July 2017, the CFTC entered [**100]  into its first non-prosecution agreements (NPA) with three former Citigroup traders who admitted to spoofing in the U.S. Treasury futures markets in 2011 and 2012. The NPAs emphasize the traders' timely and substantial cooperation, immediate willingness to accept responsibility for their misconduct, material assistance provided to the CFTC's investigation of Citigroup, and the absence of a history of prior misconduct.

In January 2018, in conjunction with the Department of Justice (DOJ) and FBI, the CFTC announced criminal and civil enforcement actions against three banks and six individuals involved in commodities fraud and spoofing schemes. The banks were fined $45.6 million in penalties.



Virtual Currency
In September 2017, as part of its work to identify and root out bad actors in the virtual currency markets, the CFTC brought its first virtual currency anti-fraud enforcement action in Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., which charged an individual and his corporation with fraud, misappropriation, and issuing false account statements in connection with operating a Bitcoin Ponzi scheme.

In January 2018, the CFTC brought three virtual currency enforcement actions: (i) My Big Coin Pay Inc., which [**101]  charged the defendants with commodity fraud and misappropriation related to  [*263]  the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin; (ii) The Entrepreneurs Headquarters Limited, which charged the defendants with a fraudulent scheme to solicit Bitcoin from members of the public, misrepresenting that customers' funds would be pooled and invested in products including binary options, making Ponzi-style payments to commodity pool participants from other participants' funds, misappropriating pool participants' funds, and failing to register as a Commodity Pool Operator; and (iii) CabbageTech, Corp., which charged the defendants with fraud and misappropriation in connection with purchases and trading of Bitcoin and Litecoin.



APPENDIX B

 [*264]  Virtual Currency Educational Materials and Outreach Activities
CFTC's Bitcoin web page Resources

Launched on December 15, 2017, the CFTC now has a dedicated web page, www.cftc.gov/bitcoin, where the public can access educational materials on the CFTC's regulatory oversight authority of virtual currencies and ways to avoid fraud in the virtual currency space.

Current resources available on www.cftc.gov/bitcoin:

• "CFTC Backgrounder on Oversight [**102]  of and Approach to Virtual Currency Futures Markets"

• LabCFTC's Virtual Currency Primer

• CFTC Talks Virtual Currency Podcast, "Roundtable with CFTC leaders on Bitcoin";

• Self-Certification Fact Sheet

• Customer Advisories on "Understand the Risks of Virtual Currency Trading" and "Beware 'IRS Approved' Virtual Currency IRAs"

Forthcoming resources to be featured on www.cftc.gov/bitcoin:

• Customer Advisories (under development; issuance expected in February 2018)

○ Bitcoin pump-and-dump schemes

○ Avoiding fraud in Bitcoin-to-gold trades

• Brochures (available digitally and printed in mid-February 2018):

○ "Virtual Currency"

 6-paneled brochure on the definition of virtual currencies, the risks associated with them, and ways to avoid fraud

○ "Bitcoin Basics"

 2-sided Bitcoin brochure that speaks about the currency's distinct traits, that fact that it is a commodity, and recommendations for spotting fraud

Virtual Currency Outreach Activities by Audience

• Reaching retail investors and industry professionals via in-person presentations at industry events, conferences and trade shows

• Targeting seniors, vulnerable populations and those who serve them:

○ Connecting national non-profits who serve seniors [**103]  and vulnerable populations to relevant CFTC virtual currency materials to use for their constituent outreach and communications

○ Distribution of both digital and print virtual currency materials to state regulators for their fraud prevention outreach

○ Participation in trainings for intermediaries, such as library staff, to educate them on the CFTC's fraud prevention resources to protect and assist their constituencies

 [*265]  • Outreach to key virtual currency demographics, such as Millennials, through digital communications designed to engage these demographics through channels and in forums they are predisposed to engage

• Engaging the general public through institutional partnerships and direct communication:

○ Working with other federal financial regulators and self-regulatory organizations to hold joint outreach activities, such as webinars, educational campaigns and community-level outreach, to build public awareness of the CFTC's virtual currency resources

○ Utilizing print and radio features to reach the public through media placements

Footnotes
†Link to the location of the note in the document
IRS Notice 2014-21, available at https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/virtual-currencies (emphasis added). Please note that this definition is not a statement of the Commission's view, and is instead offered as an aid to enhance public understanding of virtual currencies. We further note that one prominent type of virtual currency is cryptocurrency. Cryptocurrency has been described as "an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party." Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System (Oct. 31, 2008), available at https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.

†Link to the location of the note in the document
Paul Vigna, Bitcoin, Valued Like a Cool Blue Chip, Trading Like a Hot Small Cap, Wall Street Journal (Aug. 29, 2017), available at https://blogs-wsj-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/moneybeat/2017/08/28/bitcoin-valued-like-a-blue-chip-trading-like-a-small-cap/. It is important to note that there are many other virtual currencies with sizeable market capitalizations that are built upon various Blockchain technologies, but may have different characteristics or functionalities than Bitcoin, including Ethereum (or Ether), Litecoin, and Ripple.

*Link to the location of the note in the document
See generally Marco Iansiti and Karim R. Lakhani, The Truth About Blockchain, Harvard Business Review (Jan-Feb 2017), available at https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain (for a general overview of how a public Blockchain works).

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
See, In the Matter of: Coinflip, Inc., d/b/a Derivabit, and Francisco Riordan, CFTC Docket No. 15-29, available at http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfcoinfliprorder09172015.pdf.

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
Please note that this is not an exhaustive list of prohibited activities.

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
See Release No. 81207, Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO, available at https://www-sec-gov.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/litigation/investreport/34-81207.pdf.

1Link to the location of the note in the document
See generally, CFTC Talks, Episode 24, Dec. 29, 2017, Interview with Coincenter.org Director of Research, Peter Van Valkenburgh, at http://www.cftc.gov/Media/Podcast/index.htm.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
See Marc Andreessen, Why Bitcoin Matters, New York Times DealBook (Jan. 21, 2014), https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/why-bitcoin-matters/; Jerry Brito and Andrea O'Sullivan, Bitcoin: A Primer for Policymakers, George Mason University Mercatus Center (May 3, 2016),https://www.mercatus.org/publication/bitcoin-primer-policymakers; Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans, Some Simple Economics of the Blockchain, Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 2874598, MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5191-16 (last updated Sept. 21, 2017),https://papers-ssrn-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2874598; Arjun Kharpal, People [**70]  are 'underestimating' the 'great potential' of bitcoin, billionaire Peter Thiel says, CNBC (Oct. 26, 2017), https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/26/bitcoin-underestimated-peter-thiel-says.html; Hugh Son, Bitcoin 'More Than Just a Fad,' Morgan Stanley CEO Says, Bloomberg (Sept. 27, 2017), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-27/bitcoin-more-than-just-a-fad-morgan-stanley-ceo-gorman-says; Chris Brummer and Daniel Gorfine, FinTech: Building a 21st-Century Regulator's Toolkit, Milken Institute (Oct. 21, 2014), available at http://www.milkeninstitute.org/publications/view/665.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Virtual currencies are not unique in their utility in illicit activity. National currencies, like the US Dollar, and commodities, like gold and diamonds, have long been used to support criminal enterprises.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Countries that have banned Bitcoin include Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ecuador, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, Nepal, and Vietnam. China has banned Bitcoin for banking institutions.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Jay Clayton and J. Christopher Giancarlo, Regulators Are Looking at Cryptocurrency: At the SEC and CFTC We Take Our Responsibility Seriously, Wall Street Journal, Jan. 24, 2018, https://www-wsj-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/articles/regulators-are-looking-at-cryptocurrency-1516836363.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
See CFTC, Mission and Responsibilities, http://www.cftc.gov/About/MissionResponsibilities/index.htm.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Testimony of CFTC Chairman Timothy Massad before the U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry (Dec. 10, 2014), http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opamassad-6.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
In re Coinflip, Inc., Dkt. No. 15-29 (CFTC Sept. 17, 2015), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfcoinfliprorder09172015.pdf.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
In re TeraExchange LLC, Dkt. No. 15-33 (CFTC Sept. 24, 2015), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfteraexchangeorder92415.pdf.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
In re BXFNA Inc. d/b/a Bitfinex, Dkt. No. 16-19 (CFTC June 2, 2016), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfbfxnaorder060216.pdf.

11Link to the location of the note in the document
CFTC, Retail Commodity Transactions Involving Virtual Currency, 82 Fed. Reg. 60335 (Dec. 20, 2017), www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-12-20/pdf/2017-27421.pdf.

12Link to the location of the note in the document
CFTC, A CFTC Primer on Virtual Currencies (Oct. 17, 2017), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/documents/file/labcftc_primercurrencies100417.pdf.

13Link to the location of the note in the document
On September 21, 2017, the CFTC filed a complaint in federal court in the Southern District of New York against Nicholas Gelfman and Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., see http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfgelfmancomplaint09212017.pdf.

14Link to the location of the note in the document
Each CME contract represents 5 Bitcoin.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
The price changes day to day.

16Link to the location of the note in the document
Prior to the changes made in the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA) and the Commission's subsequent addition of Part 40, exchanges submitted products to the CFTC for approval. From 1922 until the CFMA was signed into law, less than 800 products were approved. Since then, exchanges have certified over 12,000 products. For financial instrument products specifically, the numbers are 494 products approved and 1,938 self-certified. See http://www.cftc.gov/IndustryOversight/ContractsProducts/index.htm.

17Link to the location of the note in the document
See CEA Section 5(d)(3), 7 U.S.C. 7(d)(3); Section 5(d)(4), 7 U.S.C. 7(d)(4); 17 C.F.R. 38.253 and 38.254(a), and Appendices B and C to Part 38 of the CFTC's regulations.

18Link to the location of the note in the document
CEA Section 5b(c)(2)(D)(iv), 7 U.S.C. 7a-1(c)(2)(D)(iv) ("The margin from each member and participant of a derivatives clearing organization shall be sufficient to cover potential exposures in normal market conditions.").

19Link to the location of the note in the document
In the case of CME and Cboe Bitcoin futures, the initial and maintenance margins were ultimately set at 47% and 44% by the respective DCOs. By way of comparison that is more than ten times the margin required for CME corn futures products.

20Link to the location of the note in the document
Unlike provisions in the CEA and Commission regulations that provide for public comment on rule self-certifications, there is no provision in statute or regulation for public input into CFTC staff review of product self-certifications. It is hard to believe that Congress was not deliberate in making that distinction.

21Link to the location of the note in the document
The CFTC has jurisdiction over retail foreign currency markets and retail commodity transactions that use leverage, margin or financing with some exceptions. Congress responded to concerns in the regulation of leveraged retail FX by providing the CFTC oversight responsibilities for Retail Foreign Exchange Dealers (RFEDs). The CFTC Re-authorization Act of 2008 amended the CEA to create a new registration category for RFEDs that include disclosure requirements and leverage limitations to customers.

22Link to the location of the note in the document
J. Christopher Giancarlo, Keynote Address of Commissioner J. Christopher Giancarlo before the Markit Group, 2016 Annual Customer Conference New York, May 10, 2016, http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-15.

23Link to the location of the note in the document
Id.

24Link to the location of the note in the document
See, e.g., Larry Greenemeier, Can't Touch This: New Encryption Scheme Targets Transaction Tampering, Scientific American, May 22, 2015, http://www.scientificamerican.com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/article/can-t-touch-this-new-encryption-scheme-targets-transaction-tampering/.

25Link to the location of the note in the document
See Massimo Morini & Robert Sams, Smart Derivatives Can Cure XVA Headaches, Risk Magazine, Aug. 27, 2015, http://www.risk.net/risk-magazine/opinion/2422606/-smart-derivatives-can-cure-xva-headaches; see also Jeffrey Maxim, UBS Bank Is Experimenting with "Smart-Bonds" Using the Bitcoin Blockchain, Bitcoin Magazine, June 12, 2015, https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/ubs-bank-experimenting-smart-bonds-using-bitcoin-blockchain-1434140571; see also Pete Harris, UBS Exploring Smart Bonds on Block Chain, Block Chain Inside Out, June 15, 2015, http://harris-on.typepad.com/block_chain_io/2015/06/ubs-exploring-smart-bonds-on-block-chain.html; See generally Galen Stops, Blockchain: Getting Beyond the Buzz, Profit & Loss, Aug.—Sept. 2015, at 20, http://www.profit-loss.com/articles/analysis/technology-analysis/blockchain-getting-beyond-the-buzz.

26Link to the location of the note in the document
See, e.g., Oversight of Dodd-Frank Act Implementation, U.S. House Financial Services Committee, http://financialservices.house.gov/dodd-frank/ (last visited Mar. 2, 2016).

27Link to the location of the note in the document
Santander InnoVentures, Oliver Wyman & Anthemis Group, The Fintech Paper 2.0: Rebooting Financial Services 15 (2015), http://santanderinnoventures.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/The-Fintech-2-0-Paper.pdf.

28Link to the location of the note in the document
Telis Demos, Bitcoin's Blockchain Technology Proves Itself in Wall Street Test, Apr. 7, 2016, The Wall Street Journal, http://www.wsj.com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/articles/bitcoins-blockchain-technology-proves-itself-in-wall-street-test-1460021421.

29Link to the location of the note in the document
Based on conversations with R3 CEV, http://r3cev.com/.

30Link to the location of the note in the document
Emiko Terazono, Commodities trader Louis Dreyfus turns to blockchainhttps, Financial Times, Jan. 22, 2018, www.ft.com/content/22b2ac1e-fd1a-11e7-a492-2c9be7f3120a.

31Link to the location of the note in the document
Frisco d'Anconia, IOTA Blockchain to Help Trace Families of Refugees During and After Conflicts, Cointelegraph.com, Aug. 8, 2017, https://cointelegraph.com/news/iota-blockchain-to-help-trace-families-of-refugees-during-and-after-conflicts.

32Link to the location of the note in the document
See supra note 22.

33Link to the location of the note in the document
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (See Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996))) and the ensuing Clinton administration "Framework for Global Electronic Commerce" (See Clinton administration, Framework for Global Electronic Commerce, http://clinton4.nara.gov/WH/New/Commerce/) established a simple and sensible framework: a) the private sector should play the leading role in innovation, development and financing; and b) governments and regulators should "do no harm" by avoiding undue restrictions, supporting a predictable, consistent and simple legal environment and respecting the "bottom-up" nature of the technology and its deployment in a global marketplace.

34Link to the location of the note in the document I. Introduction
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") sues Patrick McDonnell and his company Coin Drop Markets. CFTC alleges defendants "operated a deceptive and fraudulent virtual currency scheme . . . for purported virtual currency trading advice" and "for virtual currency purchases and trading . . . and simply misappropriated [investor] funds." See CFTC Complaint, ECF No. 1, Jan. 18, 2018, at 1 ("CFTC Compl.").

 [*217]  CFTC seeks injunctive relief, monetary penalties, and restitution of funds received in violation of the Commodity Exchange Act ("CEA"). Id. at 11.

Until Congress clarifies the matter, the CFTC has concurrent authority, along with other state and federal administrative agencies, and civil and criminal courts, over dealings in virtual currency. An important nationally and internationally traded commodity, virtual currency is tendered for payment for debts, although, unlike United States currency, [**3]  it is not legal tender that must be accepted. Title 31 U.S.C. § 5103 ("United States coins and currency . . . are legal tender for all debts . . .").



A. Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") Standing
The primary issue raised at the outset of this litigation is whether CFTC has standing to sue defendants on the theory that they have violated the CEA. Title 7 U.S.C. § 1. Presented are two questions that determine the plaintiff's standing: (1) whether virtual currency may be regulated by the CFTC as a commodity; and (2) whether the amendments to the CEA under the Dodd-Frank Act permit the CFTC to exercise its jurisdiction over fraud that does not directly involve the sale of futures or derivative contracts.

Both questions are answered in the affirmative. A "commodity" encompasses virtual currency both in economic function and in the language of the statute. Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (The CEA defines "commodity" as agricultural products and "all other goods and articles . . . and all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in.").

CFTC's broad authority extends to fraud or manipulation in derivatives markets and underlying spot markets. See Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1). CFTC may [**4]  exercise its enforcement power over fraud related to virtual currencies sold in interstate commerce. See Title 17 C.F.R. § 180.1.



B. Injunctive Relief
After hearing testimony from an Investigator in the Division of Enforcement for the CFTC, the court finds the plaintiff has made a preliminary prima facie showing that the defendants committed fraud by misappropriation of investors' funds and misrepresentation through false trading advice and promised future profits.

A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. The court finds a reasonable likelihood that without an injunction the defendants will continue to violate the CEA. An order outlining the terms of relief is issued and attached. See Appendix A, Order of Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief ("App. A, Prelim. Injunction").



II. Facts
Patrick McDonnell and his company CabbageTech, Corp., doing business as Coin Drop Markets ("defendants"), offered fraudulent trading and investment services related to virtual currency, see Description of "Virtual Currencies" infra Part III, in the spring and summer of 2017. Christopher Giglio Declaration, ECF No. 21, Feb. 26, 2018, Ex. 2 ("Giglio Decl.") ¶¶ 13,14.

Customers from the United States and abroad [**5]  paid defendants for "membership" in virtual currency trading groups purported to provide exit prices and profits of up to "300%" per week. Id. ¶¶ 17-20. Defendants advertised their services through "at least two websites, www.coindropmarkets.com and www.coindrops.club," as well as on the social media platform Twitter. Id. ¶¶ 15-17.

"Investors" transferred virtual currency to the defendants for "day" trading. Id. ¶ 21 ("McDonnell claimed that he could  [*218]  generate profits of 2 to 300% each day for [an] Investor . . . and that $1,000 in Litecoin [a type of virtual currency] should be earning $200 to $250 per day through trading.").

After receiving membership payment or virtual currency investments, defendants deleted their "social media accounts" and "websites and ceased communicating with . . . customers around July, 2017." Id. ¶ 26. Defendants provided minimal, if any, virtual currency trading advice and never achieved the promised return on investment. Id. ¶ 27. When customers asked for a return of their membership fee, or virtual currency investment, the defendants refused and misappropriated the funds. Id. ¶¶ 27-32.



III. Background of Bitcoin and Virtual Currencies

A. Description of Virtual [**6]  Currencies
Virtual currencies are generally defined as "digital assets used as a medium of exchange." Skadden's Insights, Bitcoins and Blockchain: The CFTC Takes Notice of Virtual Currencies, Jan., 2016. They are stored electronically in "digital wallets," and exchanged over the internet through a direct peer-to-peer system. Id. They are often described as "cryptocurrencies" because they use "cryptographic protocols to secure transactions . . . recorded on publicly available decentralized ledgers," called "blockchains." Brief of CFTC In Support of Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, ECF No. 21, Feb. 26, 2018, at 4 ("CFTC Brief").

The "blockchain" serves as a digital signature to verify the exchange. See Appendix B, A CFTC Primer on Virtual Currencies, Oct. 17, 2017, at 5 ("App. B, CFTC Primer"). "The public nature of the decentralized ledger allows people to recognize the transfer of virtual currency from one user to another without requiring any central intermediary in which both users need to trust." CFTC Brief, at 4. Some experts believe blockchain technology underlying virtual currencies will serve to "enhance [future] economic efficiency" and have a "broad and lasting impact on [**7]  global financial markets in payments, banking, securities settlement, title recording, cyber security and trade reporting and analysis." Appendix C, United States Senate Banking Committee, Hearing on Virtual Currency, Feb. 6, 2018 (written testimony of Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, CFTC) ("App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony"). Virtual currencies are not backed by any government, fiat currency, or commodity. Robert J. Anello, New-Wave Legal Challenges for Bitcoin and Other CryptoCurrencies, Law Journal Newsletters, Nov. 2017.

They have some characteristics of government paper currency, commodities, and securities. Allison Nathan, Interview with Eric Posner, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research, Mar. 11, 2014 ("It is a lot like gold, in fact. The difference [] is that it is digital rather than a heavy, unwieldy object. That means that it could serve the same purposes as gold in terms of a currency, but much more efficiently because it does not have any mass and can be sent easily from place to place."); cf. Power of the Executive to Change the Gold Value of the Dollar, Columbia Law Review, Vol. 48, No. 3 (Apr. 1948) ("[T]he United States is committed to a policy of international [**8]  cooperation, and in particular, to a program of international stability of [currency] exchange rates . . .").



B. Expansion and Value
The price of Bitcoin, and other virtual currencies, has risen, and then fallen, at extreme rates. Olga Kharif, All you Need to Know About Bitcoin's Rise, From $0.01 to $15,000, Bloomberg Businessweek, Dec. 1, 2017 ("The initial price of bitcoin, set in 2010, was less than 1 cent. Now it's  [*219]  crossed $16,000. Once seen as the province of nerds, libertarians and drug dealers, bitcoin today is drawing millions of dollars from hedge funds.").

As their value has increased, online exchanges have become more accessible allowing more members of the public to trade and invest in virtual currencies.

While there are many Bitcoin exchanges around the world, Coinbase has been the dominant place that ordinary Americans go to buy and sell virtual currency. No company had made it simpler to sign up, link a bank account or debit card, and begin buying Bitcoin.

The number of people with Coinbase accounts has gone from 5.5 million in January [2017] to 13.3 million at the end of November, according to data from the Altana Digital Currency Fund. In late November, Coinbase was sometimes [**9]  getting 100,000 new customers a day — leaving the company with more customers than Charles Schwab and E-Trade.

Nathaniel Popper, Coinbase: The Heart of the Bitcoin Frenzy, N.Y. Times, Dec. 6, 2017; Ian Parker, A Bitcoin A.T.M. Comes To A New York Deli, New Yorker, Sept. 18, 2017 ("A Coinsource A.T.M. accepts dollars and in return adds the bitcoin equivalent (less Coinsource's seven per cent) to a customer's digital wallet.").
According to coinmarketcap.com (viewed Feb. 6, 2018, at approximately 9:10 a.m. EST), there were over 1500 virtual currencies. Bitcoin had the largest market capitalization, valued at $121,264,863,386. Id. A single Bitcoin was valued at $7,196.92. Id. The cheapest virtual currency, Strong Hands, was valued at $0.000001. Id.

The combined market capitalization of all virtual currencies as of January 6, 2018, was roughly $795 billion; by Feb. 6, 2018, the total value had dropped to $329 billion. Coin Market Cap, https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/ (last visited Feb. 6, 2018); Arjun Kharpal, Over $60 Billion Wiped off Value of Cryptocurrencies as Bitcoin Drops Below $8,000 again, CNBC, Feb. 5, 2018 ("It was not only bitcoin that fell either. Other major virtual currencies, [**10]  including ethereum and ripple, fell sharply in the last 24 hours.").



C. Fraud and Crime
The rise in users and value of virtual currencies has been accompanied by increased fraud and criminal activity. Edgar G. Sánchez, Crypto-Currencies: The 21st Century's Money Laundering and Tax Havens, 28 U. Fla. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 167, 169 (2017) ("[T]he newest growing concern with Bitcoin, and crypto-currencies in general, are their ability to wash money and conceal taxable income.").

Silk Road, an online drug market that allowed for purchase through Bitcoin, was one of the earliest and most audacious examples of crime enabled by virtual currencies.

The largest case involving Bitcoin and illegal activity was the Silk Road case, which included billions of dollars in black market drug sales, two federal agents caught (and convicted for) stealing, and murder-for-hire attempts. While the U.S. government claimed a victory in curbing illegal activity facilitated with Bitcoin by shutting down the Silk Road's massive black market for drugs, Bitcoin is still available, and other online black markets have tripled the industry since Silk Road's closure.

Christopher Burks, Bitcoin: Breaking Bad or Breaking Barriers?, 18 N.C.J.L. & Tech. On. 244, 251-52 (2017) (internal citations omitted); see also [**11]  U.S. Attorney's Office EDNY, Long Island Woman Indicted for Bank Fraud and Money Laundering to Support Terrorists, Dec. 14, 2017 (The defendant allegedly "laundered and transferred the funds [using virtual currencies] out of the country to support the Islamic State . . .").
 [*220]  Virtual currency exchanges have been victims of hacking and theft. Reuters Staff, The Coincheck Hack and the Issue With Crypto Assets on Centralized Exchanges, Jan. 29, 2018 ("Hackers have stolen roughly 58 billion yen ($532.6 million) from Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange Coincheck Inc, raising questions about security and regulatory protection in the emerging market of digital assets."); Alex Hern, A History of Bitcoin Hacks, The Guardian, Mar. 18, 2014 ("25,000 bitcoins were stolen from their wallet after hackers compromised the Windows computer they were using. Even at the time, that sum was worth more than $500,000; it would now be worth a little less than £10m.").

These and other criminal acts have led some to call for increased governmental oversight and regulation of virtual currency.

Having delved into the prevalence of money laundering and tax evasion both globally and in the United States, and the rise [**12]  of crypto-currencies and their use in disguising real money, the question remains as to what steps can be taken to legitimize crypto-currencies, or at the very least, put an end to their use for illegal purposes.

Sánchez, supra at 188.


D. Regulation and Oversight of Virtual Currency
Congress has yet to authorize a system to regulate virtual currency. T. Gorman, Blockchain, Virtual Currencies and the Regulators, Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Jan. 11, 2018 ("As the CFTC recently admitted, U.S. law does not provide for 'direct comprehensive U.S. regulation of virtual currencies. To the contrary a multi-regulatory approach is being used.'").

The CFTC, and other agencies, claim concurrent regulatory power over virtual currency in certain settings, but concede their jurisdiction is incomplete. See App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony ("[C]urrent law does not provide any U.S. Federal regulator with such regulatory oversight authority over spot virtual currency platforms [not involving fraud] operating in the United States or abroad."); cf. Doris Kearns Goodwin, The Bully Pulpit, (2013) at 443 ("Roosevelt . . . continued to regard the judicial system as an ineffective arena for controlling giant corporations . . . Regulation, he believed, promised [**13]  a far better remedy. 'The design should be to prevent the abuses incident to the creation of unhealthy and improper combinations [] instead of waiting until they are in existence and then attempting to destroy them by civil or criminal proceedings.'"); cf. Balleisen, Bennear, Kraweic, and Weiner, Policy Shock, (2017) at 543-44 ("[T]ypes of regulatory responses to a crisis may vary along many dimensions. These responses may be robust or cosmetic. They may be structural (reorganizing government or instrumental (changing policy tools).").



1. Potential Virtual Currency Regulation
Until Congress acts to regulate virtual currency the following alternatives appear to be available:

1. No regulation. See, e.g., Nikolei M. Kaplanov, Nerdy Money: Bitcoin, the Private Digital Currency, and the Case Against Its Regulation, 25 Loy. Consumer L. Rev. 111, 113 (2012) ("This Comment will show that the federal government has no legal basis to prohibit bitcoin users from engaging in traditional consumer purchases and transfers. This Comment further argues that the federal government should refrain from passing any laws or regulations limiting the use of bitcoins . . . applying any sort of regulation to bitcoin use, [] would be ineffective and contrary to the interest of the [**14]  United States consumers.").

2. Partial regulation through criminal law prosecutions of Ponzi-like schemes  [*221]  by the Department of Justice, or state criminal agencies, or civil substantive suits based on allegations of fraud. See, e.g., United States v. Faiella, 39 F. Supp. 3d 544, 545 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) ("Defendants in this case are charged in connection with their operation of an underground market in the virtual currency 'Bitcoin' via the website 'Silk Road.'"); United States v. Lord, No. CR 15-00240-01/02, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60508, 2017 WL 1424806, at *2 (W.D. La. Apr. 20, 2017) ("Counts 2-14 charged Defendants with various other crimes associated with operating their bitcoin exchange business.").

3. Regulation by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC"). See infra Part III.D.2.

4. Regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") as securities. See, e.g., SEC v. Plexcorps, 17-CV-7007 (E.D.N.Y. Filed Dec. 1, 2017) SEC Compl., ECF No. 1 ("This is an emergency action to stop Lacroix, a recidivist securities law violator in Canada, and his partner Paradis-Royer, from further misappropriating investor funds illegally raised through the fraudulent and unregistered offer and sale of securities called 'PlexCoin' or 'PlexCoin Tokens' in a purported 'Initial Coin Offering.'"); see also Jon Hill, Accused Fraudster [**15]  Says Cryptocurrencies Aren't Securities, Feb. 27, 2018 ("According to the government, those blockchain based tokens were securities . . .").

5. Regulation by the Treasury Department's Financial Enforcement Network ("FinCEN"). See, e.g., FinCEN, Treasury's First Action Against a Foreign-Located Money Services Business, U.S. Department of the Treasury, Jul. 27, 2017 ("The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), working in coordination with the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of California, assessed a $110,003,314 civil money penalty today against BTC-e [a virtual currency exchange] for willfully violating U.S. anti-money laundering laws.").

6. Regulation by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"). See, e.g., United States v. Coinbase, Inc., No. 17-CV-01431-JSC, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 111756, 2017 WL 3035164, at *1 (N.D. Cal. July 18, 2017) ("In March 2014, the IRS issued Notice 2014-21, which describes how the IRS applies U.S. tax principles to transactions involving virtual currency. (Case No. 3:16-cv-06658-JSC, Dkt. No. 2-4 at 3 ¶ 6.) In Notice 2014-21, the IRS stated its position: virtual currencies that can be converted into traditional currency are property for tax purposes, and a taxpayer can have a gain or loss on the sale or exchange of a virtual currency, depending [**16]  on the taxpayer's cost to purchase the virtual currency.").

7. Regulation by private exchanges. See, e.g., Asian Review, Japan Tries Light Touch in Bringing Cryptocurrencies out of Regulatory Limbo, NIKKEI, Sept. 30, 2017 ("[T]here is a growing need for exchange operators to self-police to protect investors from taking on too much risk and other dangers.").

8. State regulations. See, e.g., Press Release, DFS Grants Virtual Currency License to Coinbase, Inc., N.Y. Department of Financial Services, Jan. 17, 2017 ("DFS has approved six firms for virtual currency charters or licenses, while denying those applications that did not meet DFS's standards. In addition to bitFlyer USA, DFS has granted licenses to Coinbase Inc., XRP II and Circle Internet Financial, and charters to Gemini Trust Company and itBit Trust Company.").

9. A combination of any of the above.



2. Oversight by CFTC
The CFTC is one of the federal administrative bodies currently exercising partial  [*222]  supervision of virtual currencies. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman Giancarlo Statement on Virtual Currencies, CFTC, Jan. 4, 2018 ("One thing is certain: ignoring virtual currency trading will not make it go away. Nor is it a responsible [**17]  regulatory strategy. The CFTC has an important role to play.").

Administrative and civil action has been utilized by the CFTC to expand its control:

On September 17, 2015, the [CFTC] issued an [administrative] order (the Coinflip Order) filing and simultaneously settling charges against Coinflip, Inc. (Coinflip) and its chief executive officer. In the Coinflip Order, the CFTC took the view for the first time that bitcoin and other virtual currencies are commodities subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) and CFTC regulations.

Conrad Bahlke, Recent Developments in the Regulatory Treatment of Bitcoin, 28 No. 1 Intell. Prop. & Tech. L.J. 6 (2016) (internal citations omitted); see also Reuters, U.S. CFTC Sues Three Virtual Currency Operators for Fraud, N.Y. Times, Jan. 19, 2018 ("The U.S. derivatives watchdog said on Friday that it has filed charges against three separate virtual currency operators alleging the defendants had defrauded customers and broken other commodity trading rules, in a further sign regulators globally are cracking down on the emerging asset class."); CFTC Charges Randall Crater, Mark Gillespie and My Big Coin Pay Inc. with Fraud and Misappropriation in Ongoing Virtual [**18]  Currency Scam, Jan. 24, 2018 ("The [CFTC] today announced the filing of a federal court enforcement action under seal on January 16, 2018, charging commodity fraud and misappropriation related to the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin . . .").
Legitimization and regulation of virtual currencies has followed from the CFTC's allowance of futures trading on certified exchanges. Akin Oyedele, Bitcoin Futures Trading gets Green Light from [U.S.] Regulators, Business Insider, Dec. 1, 2017 ("In a statement, the CFTC said the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the CBOE Futures Exchange self-certified new contracts for bitcoin futures products. The Cantor Exchange self-certified a new contract for bitcoin binary options. The futures contracts will make it possible to bet on bitcoin prices without buying the cryptocurrency."). Two futures exchanges, Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the CBOE Futures Exchange, as of February 23, 2018, exceeded "$150 million in daily trading volume." CFTC Brief, at 6. The CFTC has "actively policed" futures exchanges for "violating core principles" such as "failing to enforce its prohibitions against unlawful wash trading and [**19]  prearranged trades." Id.; see In Re TeraExchange LLC, CFTC No.15-33, 2015 WL 5658082 (Sept. 24, 2015).



3. Concurrent Oversight from Other Agencies
The SEC, IRS, DOJ, Treasury Department, and state agencies have increased their regulatory action in the field of virtual currencies without displacing CFTC's concurrent authority. Most current regulatory action takes the form of pursuing criminal and fraudulent conduct after it occurs.

A new division of the Securities and Exchange Commission dedicated to socalled "initial coin offerings" (ICOs) filed its first charges on Friday, targeting a scam that reportedly raised $15 million from thousands of investors by promising a 13-fold profit in less than a month.

In a criminal complaint filed in Brooklyn federal court, the new SEC division, known as the Cyber Unit, describes how Dominic Lacroix sold digital tokens known as "PlexCoins" as part of a purported  [*223]  plan "to increase access to cryptocurrency services" across the world.

Jeff John Roberts, The SEC's New Cyber Unit Just Filed Its First Charges Over an ICO Scam, Dec. 4, 2017; Robert J. Anello, New-Wave Legal Challenges for Bitcoin and Other CryptoCurrencies, Law Journal Newsletters, Nov. 2017 ("Over the last few months the SEC has demonstrated that it intends [**20]  to pursue enforcement of securities law on certain cryptocurrency transactions, especially increasingly popular [Initial Coin Offerings], in response to concerns about fraud and manipulation."); Tara Siegel Bernard, When Trading in Bitcoin, Keep the Tax Man in Mind, N.Y. Times, Jan. 18, 2018 ("In late 2016, the I.R.S. made it clear that it was searching for cryptocurrency tax evaders: The agency sent a broad request to Coinbase, the largest Bitcoin exchange in the United States, requesting records for all customers who bought digital currency from the company from 2013 to 2015.").


IV. Law

A. Jurisdiction
District courts have jurisdiction over any action in which the United States is a plaintiff. U.S. Const. Art. III § 2 ("The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases . . . [or] Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party."); 28 U.S.C. § 1345 ("Except as otherwise provided by Act of Congress, the district courts shall have original jurisdiction of all civil actions, suits or proceedings commenced by the United States, or by any agency or officer thereof expressly authorized to sue by Act of Congress.").

Under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 district courts also "have original jurisdiction of all civil actions arising under the Constitution, laws, [**21]  or treaties of the United States." See U.S. ex rel. Thistlethwaite v. Dowty Woodville Polymer, Ltd., 110 F.3d 861, 864 (2d Cir. 1997) ("[T]he subject matter jurisdiction provisions of Title 28 having broadest application are those granting the district courts power to entertain cases based on federal questions.").



B. Standing
Pursuant to Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) the CFTC may seek injunctive or other relief when it believes that a person or entity is in violation of the CEA. ("[T]he Commission may bring an action in the proper district court of the United States . . . to enjoin such act or practice, or to enforce compliance with this chapter, or any rule, regulation or order thereunder, and said courts shall have jurisdiction to entertain such actions."); see also U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Parnon Energy Inc., 875 F. Supp. 2d 233, 241 (S.D.N.Y. 2012) ("The Commission may [] bring claims alleging violations of the CEA."). Relief may be sought in the "district wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts business or in the district where the act or practice occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur." Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(e).



1. Enforcement Power of CFTC
Exclusive jurisdiction over "accounts, agreements . . . and transactions involving swaps or contracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery" has been granted to the CFTC. Title 7 U.S.C. § 2 (emphasis added). Any commodity traded as a future [**22]  must be traded on a commodity exchange approved by the CFTC. Title 7 U.S.C. § 6.

The CEA and its "remedial statutes" are to be "construed liberally" to allow for broad market protection. R&W Tech. Servs. Ltd. v. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, 205 F.3d 165, 173 (5th Cir. 2000) ("In 1974, Congress gave the Commission even greater enforcement powers, in part because of the fear that unscrupulous individuals were encouraging amateurs to trade in the commodities markets  [*224]  through fraudulent advertising. Remedial statutes are to be construed liberally, and in an era of increasing individual participation in commodities markets, the need for such protection has not lessened.").

The court generally defers to an agency's interpretation of a statute "that the agency is responsible for administering." Sierra Club, Inc. v. Leavitt, 488 F.3d 904, 911-12 (11th Cir. 2007) (citing Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1984)); Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Am. Precious Metals, LLC, 845 F. Supp. 2d 1279, 1282-83 (S.D. Fla. 2011) ("Chevron applies to the instant case because the CFTC is construing a jurisdictional provision of the CEA—a statute it is responsible for administering.") (emphasis in original).

Full deference is dependent on whether the agency's interpretation followed a formal rulemaking process. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Sterling Trading Grp., Inc., 605 F. Supp. 2d 1245, 1265-66 (S.D. Fla. 2009) (citing TVA v. Whitman, 336 F.3d 1236, 1250 (11th Cir. 2003)) ("Chevron deference is confined to those instances in which the agency renders its interpretation in the course of a rulemaking proceeding or adjudication. [E]ven if an agency's interpretation of its [**23]  own statute is advanced in the course of litigation rather than through a rulemaking or agency adjudication, courts will still pay some deference to the agency's interpretation.").



a. Virtual Currencies are Commodities
Black's Law Dictionary defines a commodity as "an article of trade or commerce." Bryan Garner, Black's Law Dictionary, (10th ed. 2014). Merriam Webster defines it as "[a]n economic good . . . [or] an article of commerce . . ." Merriam Webster, https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/commodity (last visited Feb. 5, 2018).

Commentators have argued that based on common usage, virtual currency should be interpreted as a commodity.

It would make sense for regulators to treat Bitcoin as a commodity. Commodities are generally defined as "goods sold in the market with a quality and value uniform throughout the world." This categorization would be appropriate because it realistically reflects the economic behavior of Bitcoin users and squares with traditional economic conceptions of exchange.

Mitchell Prentis, Digital Metal: Regulating Bitcoin As A Commodity, 66 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 609, 626 (2015).
Some propose that because virtual currencies provide a "store of value" they function as commodities:

A commodity is any [**24]  item that "accommodates" our physical wants and needs. And one of these physical wants is the need for a store of value. Throughout history humans have used different commodities as a store of value - even cocoa beans - but, more persistently, gold. In contrast, a security is any instrument that is "secured" against something else. As a currency is usually secured by a commodity or a government's ability to tax and defend, it is considered to be a security. By these definitions, bitcoin with a lower case "b," is a commodity, and not a currency, while Bitcoin with a capital "B" is the technology, or network, that bitcoin moves across. The analogy would be Shale technology versus shale oil.

Jeff Currie, Bullion Bests bitcoin, Not Bitcoin, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research, Mar. 11, 2014.
 [*225]  Others argue virtual currencies are commodities because they serve as a type of monetary exchange:

Bitcoin should primarily be considered a commodity because it serves the function of money in its community of users. Users exchange Bitcoins to obtain property that they desire. In his seminal work, Man, Economy, and State, Murray Rothbard argues that all monetary exchanges are actually indirect commodity [**25]  exchanges. Rothbard supports his proposition by tracing the development of money and exchange. Before the widespread adoption of a common form of money, people had to engage in bartering, or "direct exchange," in order to complete transactions . . .

Furthermore, while Bitcoin acts as a money commodity in its community of users, from a pricing standpoint, it is valued like other commodities. The price of traditional commodities, like gold, silver, and agricultural products, vary in accordance with their demand and scarcity. When more people want a commodity that has a fixed supply, the price rises.

Similarly, the price of Bitcoin fluctuates according to the same fixed supply model. Bitcoins are scarce because the algorithm controlling how many Bitcoins are released into the market through mining [] is designed to taper the supply of bitcoins, until no more are created. Bitcoins are considered rare because there is a fixed supply of them, leading users to be willing to pay increasing prices to control them. The value of a Bitcoin is ultimately driven by supply and demand—a coin is worth whatever someone is willing to pay for it.

Prentis, at 628-29 (internal citations omitted).


b. Commodity Exchange Act's [**26]  Definition of "Commodity"
CEA defines "commodities" as "wheat, cotton, rice, corn, oats, barley, rye, flaxseed, grain sorghums, mill feeds, butter, eggs, Solanum tuberosum (Irish potatoes), wool, wool tops, fats and oils (including lard, tallow, cottonseed oil, peanut oil, soybean oil, and all other fats and oils), cottonseed meal, cottonseed, peanuts, soybeans, soybean meal, livestock, livestock products, and frozen concentrated orange juice, and all other goods and articles . . . and all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in." Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (emphasis added).

The original grant of power to the CEA was designed to control trading in agricultural commodities. Other goods, as well as services, rights and interests, are now covered by the statute. See, e.g., United States v. Brooks, 681 F.3d 678, 694 (5th Cir. 2012) ("Natural gas is plainly a 'good' or 'article.' The questions thus turns on whether it is a good 'in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt with.'").

The CEA covers intangible commodities. See, e.g., In re Barclays PLC, CFTC No. 15-25 (May 20, 2015) (regulating fixed interest rate benchmarks as commodities); cf. Andrews v. Blick Art Materials, LLC, 268 F. Supp. 3d 381, 395-96 (E.D.N.Y. 2017) (quoting Pennsylvania Dep't of Corr. v. Yeskey, 524 U.S. 206, 212, 118 S. Ct. 1952, 141 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1998)) ("That [**27]  the meteoric rise of virtual reality through the Internet and its impact on communal and commercial affairs could not have been anticipated by Congress does not mean the law's application to the Internet and website is ambiguous; 'the fact that a statute can be applied in situations not expressly anticipated by Congress  [*226]  does not demonstrate ambiguity. It demonstrates breadth.'").



c. CFTC's Interpretation of "Commodity"
After an administrative proceeding in 2015, the CFTC issued an order finding, for the first time, that virtual currencies can be classified as commodities. In the Matter of: Coinflip, Inc., CFTC Docket No. 15-29 ("Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are encompassed in the definition and properly defined as commodities.").

Multiple statements defining virtual currency as a commodity have been issued by the CFTC. See App. B, CFTC Primer, at 11 ("The definition of 'commodity' in the CEA is broad . . . It can mean physical commodity, such as an agricultural product . . . It can mean currency or interest rate."); CFTC Launches Virtual Currency Resource Web Page, Press Release, Dec. 15, 2017 ("Bitcoin and other virtual currencies have been determined to be commodities under the Commodity Exchange [**28]  Act (CEA). The [CFTC] primarily regulates commodity derivatives contracts that are based on underlying commodities. While its regulatory oversight authority over commodity cash markets is limited, the CFTC maintains general anti-fraud and manipulation enforcement authority over virtual currency cash markets as a commodity in interstate commerce.").



d. Derivative Contracts and Futures
Regulatory authority over commodities traded as futures and derivatives has been granted to CFTC. Inv. Co. Inst. v. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, 720 F.3d 370, 372, 405 U.S. App. D.C. 366 (D.C. Cir. 2013) ("The Commodity Exchange Act (CEA), Title 7, United States Code, Chapter 1, establishes and defines the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Under this Act, the Commission has regulatory jurisdiction over a wide variety of markets in futures and derivatives, that is, contracts deriving their value from underlying assets.").

Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) of the CEA makes it unlawful for any person to:

use or employ, in connection with any swap, or a contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, any manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance, in contravention of such rules and regulations as the Commission shall promulgate by not later than 1 year after July [**29]  21, 2010 . . . (emphasis added).

17 C.F.R. § 180.1 further defines the regulatory power of the CFTC:

(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, in connection with any swap, or contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or contract for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, to intentionally or recklessly:

(1) Use or employ, or attempt to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;

(2) Make, or attempt to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made not untrue or misleading;

(3) Engage, or attempt to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit . . .

Liability, under the CEA, for commodity fraud, is shown by: "(1) the making of a misrepresentation, misleading statement, or a deceptive omission; (2) scienter; and (3) materiality." Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, v. Commodity Inv. Grp., Inc., No. 05 CIV 5741(HB), 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5772, 2006 WL 353466, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 11, 2006)  [*227]  (quoting CFTC v. R.J. Fitzgerald & Co., Inc., 310 F.3d 1321, 1328 (11th Cir. 2002)).



e. Regulation of Spot Market Fraud
The CFTC has recently expanded its enforcement to fraud related to spot markets underlying the (already regulated) derivative markets. See, e.g., App. B, CFTC Primer (finding the CFTC has [**30]  jurisdiction "if there is fraud or manipulation involving a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce"); CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., Case No. 17-7181 (S.D.N.Y. Filed Sept. 21, 2017) (suit brought by the CFTC alleging a Bitcoin Ponzi scheme, not involving future contracts).

In Gelfman, as in the instant case, the CFTC relied on the broad statutory authority in Section 9(1) of the CEA, and regulatory authority under 17 C.F.R. § 180.1. Specifically, the language in § 180.1 prohibiting "any person, directly or indirectly, in connection with any . . . contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce" from using a "manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud," or making "any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact."

The portion of the statute delegating oversight authority over "contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce" allows CFTC to enforce its mandate in cases not directly involving future trades. 17 C.F.R. § 180.1 (emphasis added); see Gary DeWaal, CFTC Files Charges Alleging Bitcoin Ponzi Scheme Not Involving Derivatives, Sept. 24, 2017 ("The CFTC brought its current action [Gelfman] under a relatively new provision of law (enacted as part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act) [**31]  and Commission regulation that prohibits any person from using a manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance in connection with any 'contract for sale of any commodity in interstate commerce' — not solely in connection with swaps or a commodity for future delivery.").

Where a futures market exists for a good, service, right, or interest, it may be regulated by CFTC, as a commodity, without regard to whether the dispute involves futures contracts. See, e.g., Brooks, 681 F.3d at 694-95 ("[F]utures contracts for natural gas are traded on NYMEX, and those futures are derivative of natural gas traded at Henry Hub. Nonetheless, the record shows that natural gas may be moved from any location to Henry Hub through the national pipeline system. Thus, it would be peculiar that natural gas at another hub is not a commodity, but suddenly becomes a commodity solely on the basis that it passes through Henry Hub, and ceases to be a commodity once it moves onto some other locale. While the price of that commodity may fluctuate with its location, and the forces of supply and demand at that location, the actual nature of the 'good' does not change.").

CFTC does not have regulatory authority over simple quick cash or spot transactions [**32]  that do not involve fraud or manipulation. Title 7 U.S.C. § 2(c)(2)(C)(i)(II)(bb)(AA) (The CFTC does not have jurisdiction over "spot" transactions that "[result] in actual delivery within 2 days."). This boundary has been recognized by the CFTC. It has not attempted to regulate spot trades, unless there is evidence of manipulation or fraud. See App. C, CFTC Chair, Congressional Testimony ("[T]he CFTC does not have authority to conduct regulatory oversight over spot virtual currency platforms or other cash commodities, including imposing registration requirements, surveillance and monitoring, transaction reporting, compliance with personnel conduct standards, customer education, capital adequacy, trading system safeguards, cyber security examinations or other requirements.").



 [*228]  2. Concurrent Jurisdiction
Federal agencies may have concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over a particular issue or area. See, e.g., Todd S. Aagaard, Regulatory Overlap, Overlapping Legal Fields, and Statutory Discontinuities, 29 Va. Envtl. L.J. 237, 240 (2011)) ("[T]he Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) manage overlapping statutory authorities. Both the EPA and OSHA regulate certain risks in the workplace arising [**33]  from exposures to hazardous and toxic substances.").

Agencies often cooperate to enforce their overlapping powers.

[Agencies] have explored joint rulemaking, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Transportation (DOT) collaboration on fuel standards. They have discussed coordination in individual-level adjudication, such as the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) partnering in cases involving persons without proper documentation. And they have analyzed agency collaboration in shaping policy in complex and novel areas, such as work by DHS and the National Security Agency (NSA) to combat cyber threats.

Daniel A. Farber & Anne Joseph O'Connell, Agencies As Adversaries, 105 Cal. L. Rev. 1375, 1384 (2017); but see Hunter v. F.E.R.C., 711 F.3d 155, 157, 404 U.S. App. D.C. 250 (D.C. Cir. 2013) ("Stated simply, Congress crafted CEA section 2(a)(1)(A) to give the CFTC exclusive jurisdiction over transactions conducted on futures markets.").


C. Preliminary Injunction Standard
Under Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) the CFTC may seek injunctive or other relief when it concludes that a person or entity is in violation of the CEA. "The CFTC is entitled to a preliminary injunction upon a prima facie showing that defendants have violated the Act and 'that there is a reasonable likelihood that [**34]  the wrong will be repeated.'" Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, v. Commodity Inv. Grp., Inc., No. 05 CIV 5741(HB), 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5772, 2006 WL 353466, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 11, 2006) (quoting CFTC v. British Am. Commodity Options Corp., 560 F.2d 135, 141 (2d Cir.1977)). When enforcing a statutorily prescribed injunction, the CFTC "need not prove irreparable injury or the inadequacy of other remedies as required in private injunctive suits." British Am., 560 F.2d at 141. Likelihood of future violations may be inferred from a "defendant's past conduct." CFTC v. Am. Bd. of Trade, Inc., 803 F.2d 1242, 1251 (2d Cir. 1986).



V. Application of Law

A. CFTC Standing
The CFTC has standing pursuant to Title 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(a) to seek injunctive and other relief related to misleading advice, and the fraudulent scheme and misappropriation of virtual currencies by defendants.



1. Virtual Currencies as Commodities
Virtual currencies can be regulated by CFTC as a commodity. Virtual currencies are "goods" exchanged in a market for a uniform quality and value. Mitchell Prentis, Digital Metal: Regulating Bitcoin As A Commodity, 66 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 609, 626 (2015). They fall well-within the common definition of "commodity" as well as the CEA's definition of "commodities" as "all other goods and articles . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in." Title 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9).

The jurisdictional authority of CFTC to regulate virtual currencies as commodities does not preclude other agencies from exercising their regulatory power when virtual currencies function [**35]  differently than derivative commodities. See,  [*229]  e.g., Jay Clayton [SEC Chair] and Christopher Giancarlo [CFTC Chair], Regulators are Looking at Cryptocurrency, Wall Street Journal, Jan. 24, 2018 ("The SEC does not have direct oversight of transactions in currencies or commodities. Yet some products that are labeled cryptocurrencies have characteristics that make them securities. The offer, sale and trading of such products must be carried out in compliance with securities law. The SEC will vigorously pursue those who seek to evade the registration, disclosure and antifraud requirements of our securities laws.").

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. ("CME") has filed an amicus brief. See ECF No. 27, Mar. 6, 2018. It claims to operate the "world's leading derivatives marketplace." Id. at 1. It supports the view that virtual currencies are commodities subject to the CFTC's regulatory protections. It writes:

CME offers for the Court's consideration an explanation of the possible consequences of a determination that a virtual currency such as bitcoin is not a commodity. Such a determination would put in jeopardy CME's and its market participants' expectation to rely on . . . the CFTC's regulatory protections [**36]  for commodity derivatives contracts based on virtual currencies. This legal uncertainty would substantially disrupt the settled expectations of CME and numerous market participants who are trading bitcoin futures for purposes of hedging cash market exposures or making a market in bitcoin futures by offering liquidity, in addition to market professionals that clear, broker or manage virtual currency futures trading activity.

Id. at 2.


2. CFTC Jurisdiction Over Virtual Currency Fraud
CFTC has jurisdictional authority to bring suit against defendants utilizing a scheme to defraud investors through a "contract [for] sale of [a] commodity in interstate commerce." Title 7 U.S.C. § 9(1). Although the CFTC has traditionally limited its jurisdiction primarily to "future" contracts for commodities, its expansion into spot trade commodity fraud is justified by statutory and regulatory guidelines. See CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., Case No. 17-7181 (S.D.N.Y. Filed Sept. 21, 2017); see also Gary DeWaal, CFTC Files Charges Alleging Bitcoin Ponzi Scheme Not Involving Derivatives, Sept. 24, 2017 ("This CFTC complaint [CFTC v. Gelfman Blueprint, Inc.] has significant ramifications beyond its four corners. It represents a [**37]  powerful statement by the Commission that it will exercise jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies when there is potential fraud — even if the fraud does not involve derivatives based on cryptocurrencies.").

Language in 7 U.S.C. § 9(1), and 17 C.F.R. § 180.1, establish the CFTC's regulatory authority over the manipulative schemes, fraud, and misleading statements alleged in the complaint. 17 C.F.R. § 180.1 ("It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, in connection . . . [with any] contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce . . . to [u]se or employ, or attempt to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud; [m]ake, or attempt to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made not untrue or misleading; [e]ngage, or attempt to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit . . .").



B. Prima Facie Showing of Fraud Committed by Defendants
CFTC has made a prima facie showing that the defendants committed  [*230]  fraud by misappropriation of investors' funds and misrepresentation of trading advice and future profits promised to customers. CFTC [**38]  Brief, at 11 (citing Giglio Decl. ¶ 26) ("[O]nce Defendants had solicited and obtained [] Customer funds for trading by Defendants on behalf of customers, Defendants ceased communicating with the customers and misappropriated the customers' funds."). The intentional nature of the defendants' conduct, as required by 17 C.F.R. § 180.1, is evidenced by the blatant disregard of customers' complaints and their refusal to return investors' funds. See Giglio Decl. ¶¶ 29-32; see also Hr'g Tr., Mar. 6, 2018.



C. Preliminary Injunction
A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. The court concludes that without an injunction there is a reasonable likelihood that defendants will continue to violate the CEA. A separate order outlining the terms of the relief is issued. See App. A, Prelim. Injunction.



D. Appropriate Research by Court
In deciding jurisdictional, standing and other issues fundamental to the present litigation, the court has engaged in extensive background research, but not on the specific frauds charged. This is appropriate.

The ABA has issued the following opinion related to individual research by the court:

Easy access to a vast amount of information available on the Internet exposes judges [**39]  to potential ethical problems. Judges risk violating the Model Code of Judicial Conduct by searching the Internet for information related to participants or facts in a proceeding. Independent investigation of adjudicative facts generally is prohibited unless the information is properly subject to judicial notice. The restriction on independent investigation includes individuals subject to the judge's direction and control.

Committee on Ethics and Responsibility, Independent Factual Research by Judges Via Internet, Formal Opinion 478, Dec. 8, 2017 (ABA) (emphasis added).
It is appropriate and necessary for the judge to do research required by a case in order to understand the context and background of the issues involved so long as the judge indicates to the parties the research and conclusions, by opinions and otherwise, so they may contest and clarify. See Abrams, Brewer, Medwed, et al., Evidence Cases and Materials (10th Ed. 2017) (Ch. 9 "Judicial Notice"). It would be a misapprehension of the ABA rule to conclude otherwise.

Adjudicative facts involving defendants' alleged activities have not been the subject of investigation by the court, except at an evidentiary hearing. See Hr'g [**40]  Tr., Mar. 6, 2018.



VI. Conclusion
CFTC has standing to exercise its enforcement power over fraud related to virtual currencies sold in interstate commerce. A preliminary injunction is granted in favor of the CFTC. See App. A, Prelim. Injunction.

The individual defendant's pro se motion to "Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction" is denied. ECF No. 18, Feb. 15, 2018. This court has subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1345. The CFTC has adequately pled and for purpose of a preliminary injunction proved its claim of fraud in violation of the CEA.

Any person claiming improper application of the injunctive power of the court may seek relief by motion.

SO ORDERED.

/s/ Jack B. Weinstein

Jack B. Weinstein

Senior United States District Judge

Dated: March 6, 2018

Brooklyn, New York

 [*231]  Appendix A



ORDER OF PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION AND OTHER RELIEF

I. INTRODUCTION
On January 18, 2018, Plaintiff Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("Plaintiff" or "Commission") filed a Complaint for Injunctive and Other Equitable Relief and for Civil Monetary Penalties Under the Commodity Exchange Act and Commission Regulations ("Complaint") against Defendants Patrick K. McDonnell ("McDonnell") and CabbageTech, Corp. d/b/a Coin Drop [**41]  Markets ("CDM") (collectively, "Defendants") pursuant to Section 6c(a) of the Commodity Exchange Act ("Act"), 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1 (2012).

On January 30, 2018, the court directed the parties to appear for an evidentiary hearing at which the court would consider temporary relief and further administration of the action. ECF No. 9. Subsequent Orders directed the parties to address the Commission's authority to bring this action and notified the parties that the court would hear the parties on jurisdictional, standing, and other issues at the hearing, set for March 6, 2018. ECF No. 10, ECF No. 17.

On February 26, 2018, the Commission filed its briefs and supporting documents, including the Brief of Commodity Futures Trading Commission in Support of a Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, the Declaration of Christopher Giglio, that set forth its arguments, including advocating for the issuance of an order (1) prohibiting Defendants from further violating Section 6(c)(1) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) (2012), and Commission Regulation ("Regulation") 180.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 180.1(a) (2017); (2) preserving the books and records of Defendants, and providing the Commission with access thereto; and (3) ordering Defendants to submit to an interim accounting on an expedited [**42]  basis.

On March 6, 2018, the court, with advance notice, see ECF No. 23, Feb. 27, 2018, held an evidentiary hearing on the request for preliminary injunction.

The court has considered the Brief of Commodity Futures Trading Commission in Support of a Preliminary Injunction and Other Relief, the Complaint, the Declaration of Christopher Giglio, all filings by Defendant McDonnell to date, and testimony and evidence introduced at the March 6, 2018 hearing. It finds that there is good cause for the entry of this Order and that there is no just reason for delay. The court therefore directs the entry of the following findings of fact, conclusions of law, and preliminary injunction and other equitable relief pursuant to Section 6c of the Act, as amended, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1.



II. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS THE COURT FINDS AND CONCLUDES AS FOLLOWS:

A. FINDINGS OF FACT

The Parties
1. Plaintiff Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("Commission" or "CFTC") is an independent federal regulatory agency that is charged by Congress with the administration and enforcement of the Act, 7 U.S.C. §§ 1-27f (2012), and the Regulations promulgated thereunder, 17 C.F.R. pts. 1-190 (2017).

 [*232]  2. Defendant CabbageTech, Corp. is a New York corporation based on Staten Island, New York. [**43]  It was incorporated on May 6, 2016. CabbageTech, Corp.'s last known address is 20 Rawson Place, Suite B, Staten Island, New York, 10314. At times, CabbageTech, Corp. did business as Coin Drop Markets (together with CabbageTech, Corp, "CDM"). CDM has never registered with the Commission.

3. Defendant Patrick K. McDonnell ("McDonnell") is a resident of Staten Island, New York. McDonnell formed, owned, and controlled CabbageTech, Corp. McDonnell has never registered with the Commission



Defendants' Fraud Involving Advice About Trading Virtual Currencies
4. Defendants solicited customers in several of the United States as well as foreign countries to become members of groups supposedly to receive Defendants' virtual currency consulting services and trading advice.

5. In April 2017, Defendants advertised membership in trading groups such as RedliteGreenLite, BTC ("RLGLBTC"), relating to Bitcoin, and RedliteGreenLite, LTC ("RLGLLTC"), relating to Litecoin. These groups purported to provide trading advice and guidance, such as entry and exit prices for day trading of virtual currencies. Defendants also solicited membership or subscription to other groups and services, such as a "Turn-Key Annual [**44]  Membership" providing access, for instance, to McDonnell's and CDM's supposed virtual currency trading expertise, mentorship, and guidance.

6. CDM's promotional materials made claims that a CDM membership in RLGLLTC would provide "real-time . . . reports [of] critical $LTC entry/exit points via @RLGLLTC 24/7 including holidays/weekends." These promotional materials further made claims that this continuous, ongoing monitoring and trading signals "afford[ed] 'minute-to-minute' price arbitrage, exploitation, and opportunities for swing trading profits." These promotional materials also made claims such as a trading group was "a dedicated team of digital asset trading specialists trend spotting."

7. These materials promised to provide the membership services on an annual basis in exchange for an up-front subscription fee. Defendants further solicited "lifetime" memberships, at a higher price, in a more exclusive trading sector that would provide greater opportunities to profit from virtual currency trading. One such opportunity purported to offer profits as much as a 300% return on an investment in less than a week. In or around May 2017, Defendants created one or more social media chatrooms, [**45]  purportedly to provide agreed-upon trading advice and services.

8. After receiving subscription payments from multiple CDM Customers, Defendants did not provide to such customers continuous, real-time trading signals, advice, or trading expertise through its social media chatrooms, through online communications such as via Twitter, or through its website. For example, Defendants never provided "real-time . . . reports [of] critical $LTC entry/exit points via @RLGLLTC 24/7 including holidays/weekends." Defendants' RLGLLTC never provided signals that "afford[ed] 'minute-to-minute' price arbitrage, exploitation, and opportunities for swing trading profits."

9. Defendants misappropriated CDM Customers' funds. By July 2017, Defendants shut down the website and chatroom, deleted social media accounts, ceased communicating with customers, and kept the customers' funds.



 [*233]  Defendant's Fraud Involving Management of Customer Investments in Virtual Currency
10. McDonnell described himself in solicitations as a "professional trader," and CDM's website included a purported example of a single virtual currency trade that had generated more than an approximately 1,000% return.

11. Instead of achieving enormous [**46]  gains on behalf of CDM Customers, once Defendants had solicited and obtained CDM Customer funds for trading by Defendants on behalf of customers, Defendants ceased communicating with the customers and misappropriated the customers' funds.

12. In or around May 2017, after being solicited by McDonnell, one CDM Customer provided Litecoin to Defendants for trading by McDonnell on the customer's behalf. McDonnell told this customer that he would use the customer's funds to trade the "volatility" of Litecoin. In fact, Defendants misappropriated this customer's funds and ultimately ceased communicating with the customer.



CDM's Controlling Person
13. McDonnell founded and created CDM, and controlled content on the CDM website and related social media. McDonnell controlled bank and virtual currency accounts to which he directed CDM Customers to send money for the purchase of CDM services and for Defendants-managed trading. McDonnell was responsible for developing and disseminating the false and misleading information about CDM to CDM Customers through CDM's solicitation materials.



B. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW Jurisdiction and Venue
14. The Court has jurisdiction over the subject matter of this action under [**47]  28 U.S.C. § 1331 (2012) and 28 U.S.C. § 1345 (2012). Section 6c(a) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1 (2012), authorizes the Commission to seek injunctive and other relief against any person whenever it shall appear to the Commission that such person has engaged, is engaging in, or is about to engage in any act or practice constituting a violation of any provision of the Act, or any rule, regulation, or order thereunder.

15. Venue properly lies in this District, pursuant to Section 6c(e) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 13a-1(e) (2012), because Defendants are found in, inhabit, or transact business in this District, and because acts and practices in violation of the Act occurred within this District, among other places.



Injunctive Relief is Appropriate
16. The Commission has presented a prima facie case for the purpose of obtaining a preliminary injunction based on the fact that Defendants have engaged or are engaging in violations the Act and Commission Regulations as set forth in the Complaint.

17. The Commission has demonstrated a reasonable likelihood of future violations by the Defendants.

18. A preliminary injunction and other relief are warranted in light of the allegations set forth in the Complaint, evidence submitted at a hearing held by the court, the Commission's likelihood [**48]  of success on the merits of its claims against the Defendants, and the reasonable likelihood of future violations by the Defendants.



III. RELIEF GRANTED

A. PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:

19. Defendants, their officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns,  [*234]  and attorneys, and all persons in active concert or participation with Defendants who receive notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, are hereby restrained, enjoined, and prohibited until further order of the court, from directly or indirectly, in connection with any swap, or contract of sale of any commodity in interstate commerce, or contract for future delivery on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, intentionally or recklessly:

A. using or employing, or attempting to use or employ, any manipulative device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;

B. making, or attempting to make, any untrue or misleading statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make statements made not untrue or misleading; and

C. engaging, or attempting to engage, in any act, practice, or course of business, which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon [**49]  any person; in violation of Section 6(c)(1) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 9(1) (2012), or Commission Regulation 180.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 180.1(a) (2017).

20. Defendants, their officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, or attorneys, and all persons in active concert or participation with Defendants who receive notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, are hereby restrained, enjoined, and prohibited until further order of the court, from directly or indirectly:

A. Trading on or subject to the rules of any registered entity, as that term is defined in Section 1a(40) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(40) (2012);

B. Entering into any transactions involving "commodity interests" (as that term is defined in Regulation 1.3(yy), 17 C.F.R. § 1.3(yy) (2017)) for their own personal account or for any account in which they have a direct or indirect interest;

C. Having any commodity interests traded on their behalf;

D. Controlling or directing the trading for or on behalf of any other person or entity, whether by power of attorney or otherwise, in any account involving commodity interests;

E. Soliciting, receiving, or accepting any funds from any person for the purpose of purchasing or selling any commodity;

F. Applying for registration or claiming exemption from registration [**50]  with the Commission in any capacity, and engaging in any activity requiring such registration or exemption from registration with the Commission, except as provided for in Regulation 4.14(a)(9), 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(9) (2017); and

G. Acting as a principal (as that term is defined in Regulation 3.1(a), 17 C.F.R. § 3.1(a) (2017)), agent, or any other officer or employee of any person (as that term is defined in Section 1a(38) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(38) (2012)) registered, exempted from registration, or required to be registered with the Commission except as provided for in Regulation 4.14(a)(9), 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(9) (2017). B. MAINTENANCE OF AND ACCESS TO BUSINESS RECORDS

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that:

21. Defendants are restrained from directly or indirectly destroying, mutilating, erasing, altering, concealing or disposing of, in any manner, directly or indirectly, any documents that relate to the business practices or business or personal finances of any Defendant.

22. Any financial or brokerage institution, business entity, or person that receives  [*235]  notice of this Order by personal service or otherwise, shall not:

A. directly or indirectly destroy, alter or dispose of, in any manner, any records relating to the business activities and business and personal finances [**51]  of any Defendant; and

B. deny a request by the Commission to inspect any records pertaining to any account or asset owned, controlled, managed or held by Defendants, or managed or held on behalf of, or for the benefit of, any Defendants, including, but not limited to, originals or copies of account applications, account statements, signature cards, checks, drafts, deposit tickets, transfers to and from the accounts, debit and credit instruments or slips, currency transaction reports, 1099 forms, and safe deposit box logs. As an alternative to allowing inspection of records, a financial or brokerage institution, business entity or other person may provide full un-redacted copies of records requested by the Commission. C. ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that:

23. Within five (5) business days following the service of this Order, Defendants shall submit in writing and serve upon the Commission an accounting identifying:

A. all transfers or payments of funds to them or any other entity controlled by them from any individual or entity in connection with the misconduct described in the Complaint. The identification shall include the amount of each such transfer or [**52]  payment, the date of the transfer or payment, and the name, address, account number and financial institution of the party making and the party receiving the transfer or payment;

B. in detail, the precise disposition of each such transfer or payment and any assets derived therefrom;

C. by name and address, all persons, entities and accounts currently holding funds or assets derived from such transfers or payments and the reason each received the funds or assets. The identification shall include the amount each received, the date received, the reason received, the institution and account number or location in which the funds or other assets are held and the name, address, account number and financial institution of the person or entity who provided each with the funds or other assets;

D. assets of every type and description presently owned by or held for the direct or indirect benefit, or subject to the direct or indirect control, of any Defendant, whether in the United States or elsewhere; and

E. the identification number of each account or other asset controlled, managed, or held by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of a Defendant, either individually or jointly; the balance of each such [**53]  account, or a description of the nature and value of such asset as of the close of business on the day on which this Order is served, and, if the account or other asset has been closed or removed, the date closed or removed, the total funds removed in order to close the account, and the name of the person or entity to whom such account or other asset was remitted; and the identification of any safe deposit box that is owned controlled, managed, or held by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of a Defendant, either individually or jointly, or is otherwise subject to access by Defendants.

24. Upon request by the Commission, each Defendant shall promptly provide the  [*236]  Commission with copies of all records or other documentation pertaining to any account or asset identified in response to Paragraph 23 above, including, but not limited to, originals or copies of account applications, account statements, signature cards, checks, drafts, deposit tickets, transfers to and from the accounts, all other debit and credit instruments or slips, currency transaction reports, Internal Revenue Service Forms 1099, and safe deposit box logs.



IV. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
25. Definitions. For the purposes of this [**54]  Order, the following definitions apply:

A. "Assets" means any legal or equitable interest in, right to, or claim to, any real or personal property, whether individually or jointly, directly or indirectly controlled, and wherever located, including, but not limited to: chattels, goods, instruments, equipment, fixtures, general intangibles, effects, leaseholds, mail or other deliveries, inventory, checks, notes, accounts (including, but not limited to, bank accounts and accounts at other financial institutions), credits, receivables, lines of credit, contracts (including spot, futures, options, or swaps contracts), insurance policies, and all cash, wherever located, within or outside the United States.

B. The term "document" is synonymous in meaning and equal in scope to the broad usage of the term in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 34(a).

26. Service of this Order. Copies of this Order may be served by any means, including mail, electronic mail, facsimile transmission, Fedex, and United Parcel Service, upon any financial institution or other entity or person that may have possession, custody, or control of any document or asset of Defendants, or that may be subject to any provision of this Order.

27. Bond Not Required of Plaintiff [**55] . Plaintiff is an agency of the United States, and therefore, pursuant to Section 6c(b) of the Act, 7 U.S.C. §13a-1(b) (2012), no bond is required prior to entry of this Order.

28. Continuing Jurisdiction of this Court. This Order shall remain in effect until further order of the court. The court shall retain jurisdiction over this action to ensure compliance with this Order and for all other purposes related to this action.

29. Any person claiming improper application of the injunctive power of the court may seek relief by motion.

SO ORDERED.

/s/ Jack B. Weinstein

Jack B. Weinstein

Senior United States District Judge

Dated: March 6, 2018

Brooklyn, New York



Appendix B
 [*237] 

Please note that LabCFTC cannot and will not provide legal advice. If you have specific questions regarding your activities and whether they conformto legal or regulatory requirements, you should consult with a qualified lawyer or appropriate expert. LabCFTC has no independent authority or decision-making power, and cannot independently provide, or create an expectation for, legal or regulatory relief. Communications from LabCFTC shall not create estoppel against CFTC or other enforcement actions. Any formal requests for relief must be addressed by relevant [**56]  CFTC staff or, as necessary, by the Commission. LabCFTC will work with entities on such requests with the appropriate offices through established processes.



Contents
This primer format is intended to be an educational tool regarding emerging FinTech innovations. It is not intended to describe the official policy or position of the CFTC, or to limit the CFTC's current or future positions or actions. The CFTC does not endorse the use or effectiveness of any of the financial products in this presentation. It is organized as follows:

 Overview

— What is a Virtual Currency?

— Bitcoin and Related Technologies

— Potential Uses of Virtual Currencies and Blockchain Technologies

 The Role of the CFTC

— The CFTC's Mission

— Sample Permitted and Prohibited Activities

— ICOs, Virtual Tokens, and CFTC Oversight

 Risks of Virtual Currencies

— Operational Risks

— Speculative Risks

— Cybersecurity Risks

— Fraud and Manipulation Risks



 [*238]  OVERVIEW OF VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

What is a Virtual Currency?
 Although precise definitions offered by others are varied, an IRS definition provides us with a general idea:

— "Virtual currency is a digital representation of value that functions as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, [**57]  and/or a store of value.

— In some environments, it operates like 'real' currency . . . but it does not have legal tender status [in the U.S.].

— Virtual currency that has an equivalent value in real currency, or that acts as a substitute for real currency, is referred to as 'convertible' virtual currency. Bitcoin is one example of a convertible virtual currency.

— Bitcoin can be digitally traded between users and can be purchased for, or exchanged into, U.S. dollars, Euros, and other real or virtual currencies."†Link to the text of the note



 [*239]  What is Bitcoin?
 Bitcoin is currently the largest convertible virtual currency by market capitalization (close to $72 billion in August 2017)†Link to the text of the note

 Bitcoin was created in 2008 by a person or group that used the name "Satoshi Nakamoto," with the belief that:

"[w]hat is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party."

 Bitcoin:

— Is "pseudonymous" (or partially anonymous) in that an individual is identified by an alpha-numeric public key/address;

— Relies on cryptography [**58]  (and unique digital signatures) for security based on public and private keys and complex mathematical algorithms;

— Runs on a decentralized peer-to-peer network of computers and "miners" that operate on open-source software and do "work" to validate and irrevocably log transactions on a permanent public distributed ledger visible to the entire network;

— Solves the lack of trust between participants who may be strangers to each other on a public ledger through the transaction validation work noted in the sub-bullet above; and

— Enables the transfer of ownership without the need for a trusted, central intermediary.



What is the Difference between Public and Private Ledger Systems?
 Certain virtual currencies operate on public distributed ledger systems that capture "blocks" of transactions — there is no inherent trust in this decentralized system.

— Virtual currencies create an economic incentive for dispersed, independent, computers, or groups of computers, around the world to confirm transactions and perform verifiable "work" (that creates consensus) to publish a new block of transactions on the public ledger in exchange for a payment of the applicable virtual currency.

 Private / permissioned [**59]  distributed ledger networks typically have some degree of trust between participants.

— Private ledger systems allow a network of known participants to share transaction information between themselves more efficiently.

— While cryptography and consensus may still be involved in private ledger systems, these systems do not necessarily involve a virtual currency that may serve as the economic incentive for miner or validator participation in public networks.



 [*240]  Sample Potential Use Cases of Virtual Currencies
 Store of Value

— Like precious metals, many virtual currencies are a "non-yielding" asset (meaning they do not pay dividends or interest), but they may be more fungible, divisible, and portable

— Limited or finite supply of virtual currencies may contrast with 'real' (fiat) currencies

 Trading

— Trading in virtual currencies may result in capital gains or losses

— Note that trading in virtual currencies may involve significant speculation and volatility risk (see Virtual Currency Risks section below)

 Payments and Transactions

— Some merchants and online stores are accepting virtual currencies in exchange for physical and digital goods (i.e., payments)

— Some public Blockchain systems rely [**60]  on the payment of fees in virtual currency form in order to power the network and underlying transactions

 Transfer / Move Money

— Domestic and international money transfer (e.g., remittances) in order to increase efficiencies and potentially reduce related fees



Sample Potential Use Cases of Blockchain/DLT Technology
Blockchain, or distributed ledger technology,*Link to the text of the note underpins many virtual currencies, but can also be used within private, permissioned ledger systems — versions of public and private systems may be used by:

 Financial Institutions

— Trading & Payment Platforms / Clearing and Settlement

— Regulatory Reporting, Compliance & Audit

— Know Your Customer (KYC) / Anti-Money Laundering (AML)

— Repurchase Agreement Transactions ("Repos," i.e., short-term borrowing of securities)

 Governments

— General Records Management

— Title & Ownership Records Management (e.g., real property deeds and title transfer)

— Regulatory Reporting and Oversight

 Cross-Industry

— Smart Contracts (i.e., self executing agreements)

— Resource / Asset Sharing Agreements (e.g., allowing rental of a personal car left behind during a vacation or allowing rental of excess computer or [**61]  data storage)

— Digital Identity (e.g., proof of identity when entering into a contract)



 [*241]  THE ROLE OF THE CFTC

The CFTC's Mission
 The mission of the CFTC is to foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound markets. By working to avoid systemic risk, the Commission aims to protect market users and their funds, consumers, and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to derivatives and other products that are subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).

 To foster the public interest and fulfill its mission, the CFTC will act:

— To deter and prevent price manipulation or any other disruptions to market integrity;

— To ensure the financial integrity of all transactions subject to the CEA and theavoidance of systemic risk;

— To protect all market participants from fraudulent or other abusive sales practices andmisuse of customer assets; and

— To promote responsible innovation and fair competition among boards of trade, othermarkets, and market participants.

 Responsible innovation is market-enhancing.



 [*242]  Virtual Currencies are Commodities
■ The definition of "commodity" in the CEA is broad.

— It can mean a physical commodity, such as an agricultural product (e.g., [**62]  wheat, cotton) or natural resource (e.g., gold, oil).

— It can mean a currency or interest rate.

— The CEA definition of "commodity" also includes "all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in."

 The CFTC first found that Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are properly defined as commodities in 2015.‡Link to the text of the note

 The CFTC has oversight over futures, options, and derivatives contracts.

 The CFTC's jurisdiction is implicated when a virtual currency is used in a derivatives contract, or if there is fraud or manipulation involving a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce.

— Beyond instances of fraud or manipulation, the CFTC generally does not oversee "spot" or cash market exchanges and transactions involving virtual currencies that do not utilize margin, leverage, or financing.



Examples of Permitted Activities
 TeraExchange, LLC, a Swap Execution Facility ("SEF") registered with the CFTC, entered in to the virtual currency market in 2014 by listing a Bitcoin swap for trading. Trading on a SEF platform is limited to "eligible contract participants," a type of sophisticated trader, which includes various financial institutions [**63]  and persons, with assets above specified statutory minimums.

 North American Derivatives Exchange Inc. ("NADEX"), a designated contract market ("DCM"), listed binary options based on the Tera Bitcoin Price Index from November 2014 to December 2016. Retail customers may trade on NADEX.

 LedgerX, LLC ("LedgerX") registered with the CFTC as a SEF and Derivative Clearing Organization ("DCO") in July 2017. It plans to list digital currency options.



 [*243]  Examples of Prohibited Activities‡Link to the text of the note
 Price manipulation of a virtual currency traded in interstate commerce.

 Pre-arranged or wash trading in an exchange-traded virtual currency swap or futures contract.

 A virtual currency futures or option contract or swap traded on a domestic platform or facility that has not registered with the CFTC as a SEF or DCM.

 Certain schemes involving virtual currency marketed to retail customers, such as off-exchange financed commodity transactions with persons who fail to register with the CFTC.



ICOs, Virtual Tokens, and CFTC Oversight
 The Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") recently released a report about an Initial Coin Offering or "ICO" (the "DAO Report").‡Link to the text of the note

 The DAO Report explains that "The DAO" is an example [**64]  of a "Decentralized Autonomous Organization," which is a "virtual" organization embodied in computer code and executed on a distributed ledger or blockchain.

 Investors exchanged Ether, a virtual currency, for virtual DAO "Tokens" to fund projects in which the investors would share in anticipated earnings. DAO Tokens could be resold on web-based platforms.

 Based on the facts and circumstances, the SEC determined that DAO Tokens are "securities" under the federal securities laws.

 There is no inconsistency between the SEC's analysis and the CFTC's determination that virtual currencies are commodities and that virtual tokens may be commodities or derivatives contracts depending on the particular facts and circumstances.

— The CFTC looks beyond form and considers the actual substance and purpose of an activity when applying the federal commodities laws and CFTC regulations



 [*244]  RISKS OF VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

Virtual Currencies Have Risks
 While virtual currencies have potential benefits, this emerging space also involves various risks, including:

— Operational Risks

— Cybersecurity Risks

— Speculative Risks

— Fraud and Manipulation Risks

 Virtual currencies are relatively unproven and may not perform [**65]  as expected (for example, some have questioned whether public distributed ledgers are in fact immutable).

 Investors and users of virtual currencies should educate themselves about these and other risks before getting involved.



 [*245]  Virtual Currency: Operational Risk
 Conduct extensive research before giving any money or personal information to a virtual currency platform.

 The virtual currency marketplace is comprised of many different platforms where you can convert one type of virtual currency into another or into real currency, if offered.

 Many of these platforms are not subject to the supervision which applies to regulated exchanges. For example, if they engage in only certain spot or cash market transactions and do not utilize margin, leverage, or financing, they may be subject to federal and state money transmission and anti-money laundering laws, but they do not have to follow all the rules that regulated exchanges operate under.

 Some virtual currency platforms may be missing critical system safeguards and customer protection related systems; without adequate safeguards, customers may lose some or all of their virtual assets.



Virtual Currency: Cybersecurity Risk
 Keep your property [**66]  in safe accounts and carefully verify digital wallet addresses.

 Some platforms may "commingle" (mix) customer assets in shared accounts (at a bank for real currency or a digital wallet for virtual currency). This may affect whether or how you can withdraw your currency.

 Depending on the structure and security of the digital wallet, some may be vulnerable to hacks, resulting in the theft of virtual currency or loss of customer assets.

— If a bad actor gains access to your private key, it can take your virtual currency with limited or no recourse

 When transferring virtual currency, be sure to confirm the destination wallet address, even when using "copy and paste." It is possible for hackers to change digital wallet addresses on your computer.



 [*246]  Virtual Currency: Speculative Risk
 Only invest what you are willing and able to lose.

 The virtual currency marketplace has been subject to substantial volatility and price swings.

 An individual or coordinated group trading a large amount of virtual currency at once could affect the price, depending on the overall amount of trading in the marketplace.

 Periods of high volatility with inadequate trade volume may create adverse market conditions, [**67]  leading to harmful effects such as customer orders being filled at undesirable prices.

 Some advertisements promise guaranteed returns — this can be a common tactic with fraudulent schemes.



Virtual Currency: Fraud & Manipulation Risk
 Carefully research the platform you want to use, and pay close attention to the fee structure and systems safeguards.

 Unregistered virtual currency platforms may not be able to adequately protect against market abuses by other traders.

— For example, recent news articles discuss potential "spoofing" activity and other manipulative behavior that can negatively affect prices

 Some virtual currency platforms may be selling you virtual currency directly from their own account — these types of transactions may give the platform unfair advantages and sometimes resemble fraudulent "bucket shop" schemes.

 There is also a risk of Ponzi schemers and fraudsters seeking to capitalize on the current attention focused on virtual currencies.



 [*247]  Appendix C
WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF

J. CHRISTOPHER GIANCARLO

CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

BEFORE THE

SENATE BANKING COMMITTEE

WASHINGTON, D.C.

FEBRUARY 6, 2018

Introduction: Virtual Currency

Thank you, Chairman Crapo, for the [**68]  invitation to testify before the Committee. Thank you, Ranking Member Brown, and all the members of the Committee for this opportunity to discuss virtual currencies.

At the outset, I would like to note that this hearing is timely, even fortuitous. Emerging financial technologies broadly are taking us into a new chapter of economic history. They are impacting trading, markets and the entire financial landscape with far ranging implications for capital formation and risk transfer. They include machine learning and artificial intelligence, algorithm-based trading, data analytics, "smart" contracts valuing themselves and calculating payments in real-time, and distributed ledger technologies, which over time may come to challenge traditional market infrastructure. They are transforming the world around us, and it is no surprise that these technologies are having an equally transformative impact on US capital and derivatives markets.

The more specific topic for today's hearing, however, is virtual currency. Broadly speaking, virtual currencies are a digital representation of value that may function as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, and/or a store of value. Virtual currencies generally [**69]  run on a decentralized peer-to-peer network of computers, which rely on certain network participants to validate and log transactions on a permanent, public distributed ledger, commonly known as the blockchain.

Supporters of virtual currencies see a technological solution to the age-old "double spend" problem — that has always driven the need for a trusted, central authority to ensure that an entity is capable of, and does, engage in a valid transaction. Traditionally, there has been a need for a trusted intermediary — for example a bank or other financial institution — to serve as a gatekeeper for transactions and many economic activities. Virtual currencies seek to replace the need for a central authority or intermediary with a decentralized, rules-based and open consensus mechanism.1Link to the text of the note An array of thoughtful business, technology, academic, and policy leaders have  [*248]  extrapolated some of the possible impacts that derive from such an innovation, including how market participants conduct transactions, transfer ownership, and power peer-to-peer applications and economic systems.2Link to the text of the note

Others, however, argue that this is all hype or technological alchemy and that the current interest in virtual currencies is overblown and resembles wishful thinking, a fever, even a mania. They have declared the 2017 heightened valuation of Bitcoin to be a bubble similar to the famous "Tulip Bubble" of the seventeenth century. They say that virtual currencies perform no socially useful function and, worse, can be used to evade laws or support illicit activity.3Link to the text of the note Indeed, history has demonstrated to us time-and-again that bad actors will try to invoke the concept of innovation in order to perpetrate age-old fraudulent schemes on the public. Accordingly, some assert that virtual currencies should be banned, as some nations have done.4Link to the text of the note

There is clearly no shortage of opinions on virtual currencies such as Bitcoin. In fact, virtual currencies may be all things to all people: for some, potential riches, the next big thing, a technological revolution, and an exorable value proposition; for others, a fraud, [**71]  a new form of temptation and allure, and a way to separate the unsuspecting from their money.

Perspective is critically important. As of the morning of February 5, the total value of all outstanding Bitcoin was about $130 billion based on a Bitcoin price of $7,700. The Bitcoin "market capitalization" is less than the stock market capitalization of a single "large cap" business, such as McDonalds (around $130 billion). The total value of all outstanding virtual currencies was about $365 billion. Because virtual currencies like Bitcoin are sometimes considered to be comparable to gold as an investment vehicle, it is important to recognize that the total value of all the gold in the world is estimated by the World Gold Council to be about $8 trillion which continues to dwarf the virtual currency market size. Clearly, the column inches of press attention to virtual currency far surpass its size and magnitude in today's global economy.

 [*249]  Yet, despite being a relatively small asset class, virtual currency presents novel challenges for regulators. SEC Chairman Clayton and I recently wrote:

The CFTC and SEC, along with other federal and state regulators and criminal authorities, will continue to [**72]  work together to bring transparency and integrity to these markets and, importantly, to deter and prosecute fraud and abuse. These markets are new, evolving and international. As such they require us to be nimble and forward-looking; coordinated with our state, federal and international colleagues; and engaged with important stakeholders, including Congress5Link to the text of the note.

It is this perspective that has guided our work at the CFTC on virtual currencies.

Introduction: The Mission of the CFTC:

The mission of the CFTC is to foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound derivatives markets.6Link to the text of the note By working to avoid systemic risk, the Commission aims to protect market users and their funds, consumers, and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to derivatives and other products that are subject to the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).

The CFTC was established as an independent agency in 1974, assuming responsibilities that had previously belonged to the Department of Agriculture since the 1920s. The Commission historically has been charged by the [**73]  CEA with regulatory authority over the commodity futures markets. These markets have existed since the 1860s, beginning with agricultural commodities such as wheat, corn, and cotton.

Over time, these organized commodity futures markets, known as designated contract markets (DCMs) regulated by the CFTC, have grown to include those for energy and metals commodities, collectively including crude oil, heating oil, gasoline, copper, gold, and silver. The agency now also oversees these commodity futures markets for financial products such as interest rates, stock indexes, and foreign currency. The definition of "commodity" in the CEA is broad. It can mean a physical commodity, such as an agricultural product (e.g., wheat, cotton) or natural resource (e.g., gold, oil). It can mean a currency or interest rate. The CEA definition of "commodity" also includes "all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in."

In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, President Obama and Congress enhanced the CFTC's regulatory authority. With passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and  [*250]  Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), the [**74]  agency now also oversees most of the U.S. swaps market in addition to exchange traded futures markets.

Futures, swaps and other derivatives markets are essential means for commercial and financial risk mitigation and transfer. These markets allow the risks of variable production costs, such as the price of raw materials, energy, foreign currency and interest rates, to be transferred from those who cannot afford them to those who can. They are the reason why American consumers enjoy stable prices in the grocery store, whatever the conditions out on the farm.

But derivatives markets are not just useful for agricultural producers. They impact the price and availability of heating in American homes, the energy used in factories, the interest rates borrowers pay on home mortgages and the returns workers earn on their retirement savings. More than 90 percent of Fortune 500 companies use derivatives to manage commercial or market risk in their worldwide business operations. In short, derivatives serve the needs of society to help moderate price, supply and other commercial risks to free up capital for economic growth, job creation and prosperity.

To ensure the integrity of US derivatives markets, [**75]  the CFTC regulates derivatives market participants and activities. The agency oversees a variety of individuals and organizations. These include swap execution facilities, derivatives clearing organizations, designated contract markets, swap data repositories, swap dealers, futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators, and other entities. The CFTC also prosecutes derivative market fraud and manipulation, including misconduct in underlying spot markets for commodities.



I. CFTC Authority and Oversight over Virtual Currencies
In 2015, the CFTC determined that virtual currencies, such as Bitcoin, met the definition of "commodity" under the CEA. Nevertheless, the CFTC does NOT have regulatory jurisdiction under the CEA over markets or platforms conducting cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies or other commodities or over participants on such platforms. More specifically, the CFTC does not have authority to conduct regulatory oversight over spot virtual currency platforms or other cash commodities, including imposing registration requirements, surveillance and monitoring, transaction reporting, compliance with personnel conduct standards, customer education, capital adequacy, [**76]  trading system safeguards, cyber security examinations or other requirements. In fact, current law does not provide any U.S. Federal regulator with such regulatory oversight authority over spot virtual currency platforms operating in the United States or abroad. However, the CFTC DOES have enforcement jurisdiction to investigate through subpoena and other investigative powers and, as appropriate, conduct civil enforcement action against fraud and manipulation in virtual currency derivatives markets and in underlying virtual currency spot markets.

In contrast to the spot markets, the CFTC does have both regulatory and enforcement jurisdiction under the CEA over derivatives on virtual currencies traded in the United States. This means that for derivatives on virtual currencies traded in U.S. markets, the CFTC conducts  [*251]  comprehensive regulatory oversight, including imposing registration requirements and compliance with a full range of requirements for trade practice and market surveillance, reporting and monitoring and standards for conduct, capital requirements and platform and system safeguards.



II. Assertion of CFTC Authority
The CFTC has been straightforward in asserting its area of statutory [**77]  jurisdiction concerning virtual currencies derivatives. As early as 2014, former CFTC Chairman Timothy Massad discussed virtual currencies and potential CFTC oversight under the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).7Link to the text of the note And as noted above, in 2015, the CFTC found virtual currencies to be a commodity.8Link to the text of the note In that year, the agency took enforcement action to prohibit wash trading and prearranged trades on a virtual currency derivatives platform.9Link to the text of the note In 2016, the CFTC took action against a Bitcoin futures exchange operating in the U.S. that failed to register with the agency.10Link to the text of the note Last year, the CFTC issued proposed guidance on what is a derivative market and what is a spot market in the virtual currency context.11Link to the text of the note The agency also issued warnings about valuations and volatility in spot virtual currency markets12Link to the text of the note and launched an unprecedented consumer education effort (detailed in Section IV herein).



a. Enforcement
The CFTC Division of Enforcement is a premier Federal civil enforcement agency dedicated to deterring and preventing price manipulation and other disruptions of market integrity, ensuring the financial integrity of all transactions subject to the CEA, and protecting market participants from [**78]  fraudulent or other abusive sales practices and misuse of customer assets. Appendix A hereto summarizes recent CFTC enforcement activities.

The CFTC has been particularly assertive of its enforcement jurisdiction over virtual currencies. It has formed an internal virtual currency enforcement task force to garner and deploy relevant expertise in this evolving asset class. The task force shares information and works cooperatively with counterparts at the SEC with similar virtual currency expertise.

 [*252]  In September 2017, the CFTC took enforcement action against a virtual currency Ponzi scheme.13Link to the text of the note Over the past few weeks, the CFTC filed a series of civil enforcement actions against perpetrators of fraud, market manipulation and disruptive trading involving virtual currency. These include:

(i) My Big Coin Pay Inc., which charged the defendants with commodity fraud and misappropriation related to the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin;

(ii) The Entrepreneurs Headquarters Limited, which charged the defendants with a fraudulent scheme to solicit Bitcoin from members of the public, misrepresenting that customers' funds would be pooled and invested in products [**79]  including binary options, and instead misappropriated the funds and failed to register as a Commodity Pool Operator; and

(iii) Coin Drop Markets, which charged the defendants with fraud and misappropriation in connection with purchases and trading of Bitcoin and Litecoin.

These recent enforcement actions confirm that the CFTC, working closely with the SEC and other fellow financial enforcement agencies, will aggressively prosecute bad actors that engage in fraud and manipulation regarding virtual currencies.



b. Bitcoin Futures
It is important to put the new Bitcoin futures market in perspective. It is quite small with open interest at the CME of 6,695 bitcoin14Link to the text of the note and at Cboe Futures Exchange (Cboe) of 6,695 bitcoin (as of Feb. 2, 2018). At a price of approximately $7,700 per Bitcoin,15Link to the text of the note this represents a notional amount of about $94 million. In comparison, the notional amount of the open interest in CME's WTI crude oil futures was more than one thousand times greater, about $170 billion (2,600,000 contracts) as of Feb 2, 2018 and the notional amount represented by the open interest of Comex gold futures was about $74 billion (549,000 contracts).

Prior to the launch of Bitcoin futures, the CFTC [**80]  closely observed the evolution of virtual currencies over the past several years. One exchange, CME Group, launched a Bitcoin Reference Rate in November 2016. And, another exchange, CBOE Futures Exchange (Cboe), first approached the CFTC in July 2017. The CFTC anticipated receiving proposals for the launch of Bitcoin futures products in late 2017.

 [*253]  Under CEA and Commission regulations and related guidance, futures exchanges may self-certify new products on twenty-four hour notice prior to trading. In the past decade and a half, over 12,000 new futures products have been self-certified.16Link to the text of the note It is clear that Congress and prior Commissions deliberately designed the product self-certification framework to give futures exchanges, in their role as self-regulatory organizations, the ability to quickly bring new products to the marketplace. The CFTC's current product self-certification framework has long been considered to function well and be consistent with public policy that encourages market-driven innovation that has made America's listed futures markets the envy of the world.

Practically, both CME and Cboe had numerous discussions and exchanged numerous draft product terms and conditions [**81]  with CFTC staff over a course of months prior to their certifying and launching Bitcoin futures in December 2017. This type of lengthy engagement is not unusual during the self-certification process for products that may raise certain issues. The CFTC staff undertook its review of CME's and Cboe's Bitcoin futures products with considered attention. Given the emerging nature and heightened attention of these products, staff conducted a "heightened review" of CME's and Cboe's responsibilities under the CEA and Commission regulations to ensure that their Bitcoin futures products and their cash-settlement processes were not readily susceptible to manipulation,17Link to the text of the note and the risk management of the associated Derivatives Clearing Organizations (DCOs) to ensure that the products were sufficiently margined.18Link to the text of the note

Staff obtained the voluntary cooperation of CME and Cboe with a set of enhanced monitoring and risk management steps.

1. Designated contract markets (DCMs) setting exchange large trader reporting thresholds at five bitcoins or less;

2. DCMs entering direct or indirect information sharing agreements with spot market platforms to allow access to trade and trader data making up the underlying index [**82]  that the futures contracts settle to;

3. DCMs agreeing to engage in monitoring of underlying index data from cash markets and identifying anomalies and disproportionate moves;

4. DCMs agreeing to conduct inquiries, as appropriate, including at the trade settlement and trader level when anomalies or disproportionate moves are identified;

5. DCMs agreeing to regular communication with CFTC surveillance staff on trade activities, including providing trade settlement and trader data upon request;

 [*254]  6. DCMs agreeing to coordinate product launches to enable the CFTC's market surveillance branch to monitor developments; and

7. DCOs setting substantially high initial19Link to the text of the note and maintenance margin for cash-settled instruments.

The first six of these elements were used to ensure that the new product offerings complied with the DCM's obligations under the CEA core principles and CFTC regulations and related guidance. The seventh element, setting high initial and maintenance margins, was designed to ensure adequate collateral coverage in reaction to the underlying volatility of Bitcoin.

In crafting its process of "heightened review" for compliance, CFTC staff prioritized visibility, data, and monitoring of markets [**83]  for Bitcoin derivatives and underlying settlement reference rates. CFTC staff felt that in gaining such visibility, the CFTC could best look out for Bitcoin market participants and consumers, as well as the public interest in Federal surveillance and enforcement. This visibility greatly enhances the agency's ability to prosecute fraud and manipulation in both the new Bitcoin futures markets and in its related underlying cash markets.

As for the interests of clearing members, the CFTC recognized that large global banks and brokerages that are DCO clearing members are able to look after their own commercial interests by choosing not to trade Bitcoin futures, as some have done, requiring substantially higher initial margins from their customers, as many have done, and through their active participation in DCO risk committees.

After the launch of Bitcoin futures, some criticism was directed at the self-certification process from a few market participants. Some questioned why the Commission did not hold public hearings prior to launch. However, it is the function of the futures exchanges and futures clearinghouses - and not CFTC staff20Link to the text of the note - to solicit and address stakeholder concerns in new product [**84]  self-certifications. The CFTC staff's focus was on how the futures contracts and cash settlement indices are designed to bar manipulation and the appropriate level of contract margining to meet CEA and Commission regulations.

Interested parties, especially clearing members, should indeed have an opportunity to raise appropriate concerns for consideration by regulated platforms proposing virtual currency derivatives and DCOs considering clearing new virtual currency products. That is why CFTC staff has added an additional element to the Review and Compliance Checklist for virtual  [*255]  currency product self-certifications. That is, requesting DCMs and SEFs to disclose to CFTC staff what steps they have taken in their capacity as self-regulatory organizations to gather and accommodate appropriate input from concerned parties, including trading firms and FCMs. Further, CFTC staff will take a close look at DCO governance around the clearing of new virtual currency products and formulate recommendations for possible further action.

The CFTC's response to the self-certification of Bitcoin futures has been a balanced one. It has resulted in the world's first federally regulated Bitcoin [**85]  futures market. Had it even been possible, blocking self-certification would not have stopped the rise of Bitcoin or other virtual currencies. Instead, it would have ensured that virtual currency spot markets continue to operate without effective and data-enabled federal regulatory surveillance for fraud and manipulation. It would have prevented the development of a regulated derivatives market that allowed participants to take "short" positions that challenged the 2017 rise of Bitcoin prices.



III. Adequacy of CFTC Authority
The CFTC has sufficient authority under the CEA to protect investors in virtual currency derivatives over which the CFTC has regulatory jurisdiction under the CEA. As noted above, the CFTC does NOT have regulatory jurisdiction over markets or platforms conducting cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies or over participants on those platforms. For such virtual currency spot markets, CFTC only has enforcement jurisdiction to investigate and, as appropriate, conduct civil enforcement action against fraud and manipulation.

Any extension of the CFTC's regulatory authority to virtual currency spot markets would require statutory amendment of the CEA.21Link to the text of the note The CFTC [**86]  is an experienced regulator of derivatives markets that mostly serve professional and eligible contract participants. Such extension of regulatory authority would be a dramatic expansion of the CFTC's regulatory mission, which currently does not give the CFTC regulatory authority (distinct from enforcement authority) over cash commodity markets.



IV. Educating Investors and Market Participants
The CFTC believes that the responsible regulatory response to virtual currencies must start with consumer education. Amidst the wild assertions, bold headlines, and shocking hyperbole about virtual currencies, there is a need for much greater understanding and clarity.

 [*256]  Over the past six months, the CFTC has produced an unprecedented amount of consumer information concerning virtual currencies (listed in Appendix B hereto). These consumer materials include an information "primer" on virtual currencies (Appendix C hereto), consumer and market advisories on investing in Bitcoin and other virtual currencies (Appendix D hereto), a dedicated CFTC "Bitcoin" webpage, several podcasts (available on the Commission's website and from various streaming services) concerning virtual currencies and underlying [**87]  technology, weekly publication of Bitcoin futures "Commitment of Traders" data and an analysis of Bitcoin spot market data.

In addition, the CFTC's Office of Consumer Education and Outreach (OCEO) is actively engaging with responsible outside partners to better educate consumers on Bitcoin and other virtual currencies. The OCEO is currently partnering with:

• The Consumer Finance Protection Bureau (CFPB) to train US public library staff to identify and report consumer in virtual currencies;

• the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) to distribute a virtual currency "Watchdog Alert" to 120,000 AARP members;

• North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) Investor Educators, who are responsible for conducting outreach to the public on avoiding investment fraud, including in virtual currencies;

• the National Attorneys General Training and Research Institute (NAGTRI), which is the research and training arm of the National Association of Attorneys General (NAAG), to inform State AGs about the availability of CFTC's virtual currency resources; and

• The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago to help consumers manage their finances better, OCEO will again coordinate with NFA, [**88]  FINRA and SEC to hold a webinar on fraud prevention in virtual currencies.



V. Interagency Coordination
As noted, the CFTC's enforcement jurisdiction over virtual currencies is not exclusive. As a result, the U.S. approach to oversight of virtual currencies has evolved into a multifaceted, multi-regulatory approach that includes:

• The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) taking increasingly strong action against unregistered securities offerings, whether they are called a virtual currency or initial coin offering in name.

• State Banking regulators overseeing certain US and foreign virtual currency spot exchanges largely through state money transfer laws.

• The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) treating virtual currencies as property subject to capital gains tax.

 [*257]  • The Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) monitoring Bitcoin and other virtual currency transfers for anti-money laundering purposes.

The CFTC actively communicates its approach to virtual currencies with other Federal regulators, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Justice Department and through the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), chaired by the Treasury Department. The [**89]  CFTC has been in close communication with the SEC with respect to policy and jurisdictional considerations, especially in connection with recent virtual currency enforcement cases. In addition, we have been in communication with overseas regulatory counterparts through bilateral discussions and in meetings of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).



VI. Potential Benefits
I have spoken publicly about the potential benefits of the technology underlying Bitcoin, namely Blockchain or distributed ledger technology (DLT).22Link to the text of the note Distributed ledgers — in various open system or private network applications — have the potential to enhance economic efficiency, mitigate centralized systemic risk, defend against fraudulent activity and improve data quality and governance.23Link to the text of the note

DLT is likely to have a broad and lasting impact on global financial markets in payments, banking, securities settlement, title recording, cyber security and trade reporting and analysis.24Link to the text of the note When tied to virtual currencies, this technology aims to serve [**90]  as a new store of value, facilitate secure payments, enable asset transfers, and power new applications.

Additionally, DLT will likely develop hand-in-hand with new "smart" contracts that can value themselves in real-time, report themselves to data repositories, automatically calculate and perform margin payments and even terminate themselves in the event of counterparty default.25Link to the text of the note

DLT may enable financial market participants to manage the significant operational,  [*258]  transactional and capital complexities brought about by the many mandates, regulations and capital requirements promulgated by regulators here and abroad in the wake of the financial crisis.26Link to the text of the note In fact, one study estimates that DLT could eventually allow financial institutions to save as much as $20 billion in infrastructure and operational costs each year.27Link to the text of the note Another study reportedly estimates that blockchain could cut trading settlement [**91]  costs by a third, or $16 billion a year, and cut capital requirements by $120 billion.28Link to the text of the note Moving from systems-of-record at the level of a firm to an authoritative system-of-record at the level of a market is an enormous opportunity to improve existing market infrastructure.29Link to the text of the note

Outside of the financial services industry, many use cases for DLT are being posited from international trade to charitable endeavors and social services. International agricultural commodities merchant, Louis Dreyfus, and a group of financing banks have just completed the first agricultural deal using distributed ledger technology for the sale of 60,000 tons of US soybeans to China.30Link to the text of the note Other DLT use cases include: legal records management, inventory control and logistics, charitable donation tracking and confirmation; voting security and human refugee identification and relocation.31Link to the text of the note

Yet, while DLT promises enormous benefits to commercial firms and charities, it also promises [**92]  assistance to financial market regulators in meeting their mission to oversee healthy markets and mitigate financial risk. What a difference it would have made on the eve of the financial crisis in 2008 if regulators had access to the real-time trading ledgers of large Wall Street banks, rather than trying to assemble piecemeal data to recreate complex, individual trading portfolios. I have previously speculated32Link to the text of the note that, if regulators in 2008 could have viewed a real-time distributed ledger (or a series of aggregated ledgers across asset classes) and, perhaps, been able to utilize modern cognitive computing capabilities, they may have been able to recognize anomalies in market-wide trading activity and diverging counterparty exposures indicating heightened risk of bank failure. Such transparency may not, by itself, have saved Lehman Brothers from bankruptcy, but it certainly would have allowed for far prompter, better-informed, and more calibrated regulatory intervention instead of the disorganized response that unfortunately ensued.



 [*259]  VII. Policy Considerations
Two decades ago, as the Internet was entering a phase of rapid growth and expansion, a Republican Congress and the Clinton [**93]  administration established a set of enlightened foundational principles: the Internet was to progress through human social interaction; voluntary contractual relations and free markets; and governments and regulators were to act in a thoughtful manner not to harm the Internet's continuing evolution.33Link to the text of the note

This simple approach is well-recognized as the enlightened regulatory underpinning of the Internet that brought about such profound changes to human society. During the almost 20 years of "do no harm" regulation, a massive amount of investment was made in the Internet's infrastructure. It yielded a rapid expansion in access that supported swift deployment and mass adoption of Internet-based technologies. Internet-based innovations have revolutionized nearly every aspect of American life, from telecommunications to commerce, transportation and research and development. This robust Internet economy has created jobs, increased productivity and fostered innovation and consumer choice.

"Do no harm" was unquestionably the right approach to development of the Internet. Similarly, I believe that "do no harm" is the right overarching approach for distributed ledger technology.

Virtual currencies, [**94]  however, likely require more attentive regulatory oversight in key areas, especially to the extent that retail investors are attracted to this space. SEC Chairman Clayton and I recently stated in a joint op-ed, that:

"Our task, as market regulators, is to set and enforce rules that foster innovation while promoting market integrity and confidence. In recent months, we have seen a wide range of market participants, including retail investors, seeking to invest in DLT initiatives, including through cryptocurrencies and so-called ICOs—initial coin offerings. Experience tells us that while some market participants may make fortunes, the risks to all investors are high. Caution is merited.

"A key issue before market regulators is whether our historic approach to the regulation of currency transactions is appropriate for the cryptocurrency markets. Check-cashing and money-transmission services that operate in the U.S. are primarily state-regulated. Many of the internet-based cryptocurrency trading platforms have registered as payment services and are not subject to  [*260]  direct oversight by the SEC or the CFTC. We would support policy efforts to revisit these frameworks and ensure they are effective [**95]  and efficient for the digital era."34Link to the text of the note

As the Senate Banking Committee, the Senate Agriculture Committee and other Congressional policy makers consider the current state of regulatory oversight of cash or "spot" transactions in virtual currencies and trading platforms, consideration should be given to shortcomings of the current approach of state-by-state money transmitter licensure that leaves gaps in protection for virtual currency traders and investors. Any proposed Federal regulation of virtual currency platforms should be carefully tailored to the risks posed by relevant trading activity and enhancing efforts to prosecute fraud and manipulation. Appropriate Federal oversight may include: data reporting, capital requirements, cyber security standards, measures to prevent fraud and price manipulation and anti-money laundering and "know your customer" protections. Overall, a rationalized federal framework may be more effective and efficient in ensuring the integrity of the underlying market.



Conclusion
We are entering a new digital era in world financial markets. As we saw with the development of the Internet, we cannot put the technology genie back in the bottle. Virtual currencies [**96]  mark a paradigm shift in how we think about payments, traditional financial processes, and engaging in economic activity. Ignoring these developments will not make them go away, nor is it a responsible regulatory response. The evolution of these assets, their volatility, and the interest they attract from a rising global millennial population demand serious examination.

With the proper balance of sound policy, regulatory oversight and private sector innovation, new technologies will allow American markets to evolve in responsible ways and continue to grow our economy and increase prosperity. This hearing is an important part of finding that balance.

Thank you for inviting me to participate.



Appendix A

 [*261]  CFTC Enforcement Activities: Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 Year Through the Present

Overview of FY 2017
In the fiscal year that ended September 30, 2017, the CFTC brought 49 enforcement-related actions, which included significant actions to root out manipulation and spoofing and to protect retail investors from fraud. The CFTC also pursued significant and complex litigation, including cases charging manipulation, spoofing, and unlawful use of customer funds. The CFTC obtained orders totaling $412,726,307 [**97]  in restitution, disgorgement and penalties. Specifically, in the fiscal year, the CFTC obtained $333,830,145 in civil monetary penalties and $78,896,162 million in restitution and disgorgement orders. Of the civil monetary penalties imposed, the CFTC collected and deposited at the U.S. Treasury more than $265 million.



Retail Fraud
The CFTC brought a significant number of retail fraud actions in FY 2017 (20 out of the 49). For example, in February 2017, the CFTC filed and settled charges against Forex Capital Markets LLC for $7 million for defrauding retail foreign exchange customers over a five year time period by concealing its relationship with its most important market maker and misrepresenting that its platform had no conflicts of interests with its customers. That month the CFTC also brought an action charging Carlos Javier Ramirez, Gold Chasers, Inc., and Royal Leisure International, Inc. with misappropriating millions in customer funds and engaging in fraudulent sales solicitations in connection with a Ponzi scheme involving the purported purchase of physical gold.

In May 2017, the CFTC filed charges against an individual and his company with defrauding 40 investors out of at least [**98]  $13 million in connection with a commodity pool they operated; investors included family members and members of his church. In June 2017, the CFTC filed charges against two individuals and their company with fraudulently soliciting customers, including at a church gathering, and defrauding them out of more than $11 million. The pair was also arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) on related criminal charges.

In September 2017, the CFTC filed one of the largest precious metals fraud cases in the history of the Commission. As alleged, the Defendants defrauded thousands of retail customers—many of whom are elderly—out of hundreds of millions of dollars as part of a multi-year scheme in connection with illegal, off-exchange leveraged precious metal transactions.



Market Manipulation
In February 2017, the CFTC settled with RBS for $85 million for attempted manipulation of ISDAFIX, a leading global benchmark for interest rate swaps and related derivatives. The CFTC  [*262]  also brought actions against The Royal Bank of Scotland plc and Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and Goldman, Sachs & Co. for attempted manipulation of the ISDAFIX, resulting in $85 million and $120 million in penalties, respectively. [**99]  In February 2018, the CFTC settled with Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. for $70 million for attempted manipulation of ISDAFIX.

Since 2012, the CFTC has imposed over $5 billion in penalties against banks and brokers with respect to benchmark manipulation settlements.



Disruptive Trading
In November 2016, the CFTC entered into a consent order with Navinder Singh Sarao and Nav Sarao Futures Limited PLC to settle allegations related to the 2010 flash crash for $25.7 million in monetary sanctions, $12.9 million in disgorgement, and a permanent trading and registration ban. In December 2016, the CFTC settled with trading company 3Red and trader Igor Oystacher imposing a $2.5 million penalty, a monitor for three years, and requiring the use of certain trading compliance tools for intentionally and repeatedly engaging in a manipulative and deceptive spoofing scheme while placing orders for and trading futures contracts on multiple registered entities.

In January 2017, the CFTC fined Citigroup $25 million for failing to diligently supervise the activities of its employees and agents in conjunction with spoofing orders in the U.S. Treasury futures markets. Later that year, in July 2017, the CFTC entered [**100]  into its first non-prosecution agreements (NPA) with three former Citigroup traders who admitted to spoofing in the U.S. Treasury futures markets in 2011 and 2012. The NPAs emphasize the traders' timely and substantial cooperation, immediate willingness to accept responsibility for their misconduct, material assistance provided to the CFTC's investigation of Citigroup, and the absence of a history of prior misconduct.

In January 2018, in conjunction with the Department of Justice (DOJ) and FBI, the CFTC announced criminal and civil enforcement actions against three banks and six individuals involved in commodities fraud and spoofing schemes. The banks were fined $45.6 million in penalties.



Virtual Currency
In September 2017, as part of its work to identify and root out bad actors in the virtual currency markets, the CFTC brought its first virtual currency anti-fraud enforcement action in Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., which charged an individual and his corporation with fraud, misappropriation, and issuing false account statements in connection with operating a Bitcoin Ponzi scheme.

In January 2018, the CFTC brought three virtual currency enforcement actions: (i) My Big Coin Pay Inc., which [**101]  charged the defendants with commodity fraud and misappropriation related to  [*263]  the ongoing solicitation of customers for a virtual currency known as My Big Coin; (ii) The Entrepreneurs Headquarters Limited, which charged the defendants with a fraudulent scheme to solicit Bitcoin from members of the public, misrepresenting that customers' funds would be pooled and invested in products including binary options, making Ponzi-style payments to commodity pool participants from other participants' funds, misappropriating pool participants' funds, and failing to register as a Commodity Pool Operator; and (iii) CabbageTech, Corp., which charged the defendants with fraud and misappropriation in connection with purchases and trading of Bitcoin and Litecoin.



APPENDIX B

 [*264]  Virtual Currency Educational Materials and Outreach Activities
CFTC's Bitcoin web page Resources

Launched on December 15, 2017, the CFTC now has a dedicated web page, www.cftc.gov/bitcoin, where the public can access educational materials on the CFTC's regulatory oversight authority of virtual currencies and ways to avoid fraud in the virtual currency space.

Current resources available on www.cftc.gov/bitcoin:

• "CFTC Backgrounder on Oversight [**102]  of and Approach to Virtual Currency Futures Markets"

• LabCFTC's Virtual Currency Primer

• CFTC Talks Virtual Currency Podcast, "Roundtable with CFTC leaders on Bitcoin";

• Self-Certification Fact Sheet

• Customer Advisories on "Understand the Risks of Virtual Currency Trading" and "Beware 'IRS Approved' Virtual Currency IRAs"

Forthcoming resources to be featured on www.cftc.gov/bitcoin:

• Customer Advisories (under development; issuance expected in February 2018)

○ Bitcoin pump-and-dump schemes

○ Avoiding fraud in Bitcoin-to-gold trades

• Brochures (available digitally and printed in mid-February 2018):

○ "Virtual Currency"

 6-paneled brochure on the definition of virtual currencies, the risks associated with them, and ways to avoid fraud

○ "Bitcoin Basics"

 2-sided Bitcoin brochure that speaks about the currency's distinct traits, that fact that it is a commodity, and recommendations for spotting fraud

Virtual Currency Outreach Activities by Audience

• Reaching retail investors and industry professionals via in-person presentations at industry events, conferences and trade shows

• Targeting seniors, vulnerable populations and those who serve them:

○ Connecting national non-profits who serve seniors [**103]  and vulnerable populations to relevant CFTC virtual currency materials to use for their constituent outreach and communications

○ Distribution of both digital and print virtual currency materials to state regulators for their fraud prevention outreach

○ Participation in trainings for intermediaries, such as library staff, to educate them on the CFTC's fraud prevention resources to protect and assist their constituencies

 [*265]  • Outreach to key virtual currency demographics, such as Millennials, through digital communications designed to engage these demographics through channels and in forums they are predisposed to engage

• Engaging the general public through institutional partnerships and direct communication:

○ Working with other federal financial regulators and self-regulatory organizations to hold joint outreach activities, such as webinars, educational campaigns and community-level outreach, to build public awareness of the CFTC's virtual currency resources

○ Utilizing print and radio features to reach the public through media placements

Footnotes
†Link to the location of the note in the document
IRS Notice 2014-21, available at https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/virtual-currencies (emphasis added). Please note that this definition is not a statement of the Commission's view, and is instead offered as an aid to enhance public understanding of virtual currencies. We further note that one prominent type of virtual currency is cryptocurrency. Cryptocurrency has been described as "an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party." Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System (Oct. 31, 2008), available at https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.

†Link to the location of the note in the document
Paul Vigna, Bitcoin, Valued Like a Cool Blue Chip, Trading Like a Hot Small Cap, Wall Street Journal (Aug. 29, 2017), available at https://blogs-wsj-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/moneybeat/2017/08/28/bitcoin-valued-like-a-blue-chip-trading-like-a-small-cap/. It is important to note that there are many other virtual currencies with sizeable market capitalizations that are built upon various Blockchain technologies, but may have different characteristics or functionalities than Bitcoin, including Ethereum (or Ether), Litecoin, and Ripple.

*Link to the location of the note in the document
See generally Marco Iansiti and Karim R. Lakhani, The Truth About Blockchain, Harvard Business Review (Jan-Feb 2017), available at https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain (for a general overview of how a public Blockchain works).

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
See, In the Matter of: Coinflip, Inc., d/b/a Derivabit, and Francisco Riordan, CFTC Docket No. 15-29, available at http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfcoinfliprorder09172015.pdf.

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
Please note that this is not an exhaustive list of prohibited activities.

‡Link to the location of the note in the document
See Release No. 81207, Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO, available at https://www-sec-gov.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/litigation/investreport/34-81207.pdf.

1Link to the location of the note in the document
See generally, CFTC Talks, Episode 24, Dec. 29, 2017, Interview with Coincenter.org Director of Research, Peter Van Valkenburgh, at http://www.cftc.gov/Media/Podcast/index.htm.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
See Marc Andreessen, Why Bitcoin Matters, New York Times DealBook (Jan. 21, 2014), https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/why-bitcoin-matters/; Jerry Brito and Andrea O'Sullivan, Bitcoin: A Primer for Policymakers, George Mason University Mercatus Center (May 3, 2016),https://www.mercatus.org/publication/bitcoin-primer-policymakers; Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans, Some Simple Economics of the Blockchain, Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 2874598, MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5191-16 (last updated Sept. 21, 2017),https://papers-ssrn-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2874598; Arjun Kharpal, People [**70]  are 'underestimating' the 'great potential' of bitcoin, billionaire Peter Thiel says, CNBC (Oct. 26, 2017), https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/26/bitcoin-underestimated-peter-thiel-says.html; Hugh Son, Bitcoin 'More Than Just a Fad,' Morgan Stanley CEO Says, Bloomberg (Sept. 27, 2017), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-27/bitcoin-more-than-just-a-fad-morgan-stanley-ceo-gorman-says; Chris Brummer and Daniel Gorfine, FinTech: Building a 21st-Century Regulator's Toolkit, Milken Institute (Oct. 21, 2014), available at http://www.milkeninstitute.org/publications/view/665.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Virtual currencies are not unique in their utility in illicit activity. National currencies, like the US Dollar, and commodities, like gold and diamonds, have long been used to support criminal enterprises.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Countries that have banned Bitcoin include Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ecuador, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, Nepal, and Vietnam. China has banned Bitcoin for banking institutions.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Jay Clayton and J. Christopher Giancarlo, Regulators Are Looking at Cryptocurrency: At the SEC and CFTC We Take Our Responsibility Seriously, Wall Street Journal, Jan. 24, 2018, https://www-wsj-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/articles/regulators-are-looking-at-cryptocurrency-1516836363.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
See CFTC, Mission and Responsibilities, http://www.cftc.gov/About/MissionResponsibilities/index.htm.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Testimony of CFTC Chairman Timothy Massad before the U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry (Dec. 10, 2014), http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opamassad-6.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
In re Coinflip, Inc., Dkt. No. 15-29 (CFTC Sept. 17, 2015), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfcoinfliprorder09172015.pdf.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
In re TeraExchange LLC, Dkt. No. 15-33 (CFTC Sept. 24, 2015), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfteraexchangeorder92415.pdf.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
In re BXFNA Inc. d/b/a Bitfinex, Dkt. No. 16-19 (CFTC June 2, 2016), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfbfxnaorder060216.pdf.

11Link to the location of the note in the document
CFTC, Retail Commodity Transactions Involving Virtual Currency, 82 Fed. Reg. 60335 (Dec. 20, 2017), www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-12-20/pdf/2017-27421.pdf.

12Link to the location of the note in the document
CFTC, A CFTC Primer on Virtual Currencies (Oct. 17, 2017), http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/documents/file/labcftc_primercurrencies100417.pdf.

13Link to the location of the note in the document
On September 21, 2017, the CFTC filed a complaint in federal court in the Southern District of New York against Nicholas Gelfman and Gelfman Blueprint, Inc., see http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfgelfmancomplaint09212017.pdf.

14Link to the location of the note in the document
Each CME contract represents 5 Bitcoin.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
The price changes day to day.

16Link to the location of the note in the document
Prior to the changes made in the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA) and the Commission's subsequent addition of Part 40, exchanges submitted products to the CFTC for approval. From 1922 until the CFMA was signed into law, less than 800 products were approved. Since then, exchanges have certified over 12,000 products. For financial instrument products specifically, the numbers are 494 products approved and 1,938 self-certified. See http://www.cftc.gov/IndustryOversight/ContractsProducts/index.htm.

17Link to the location of the note in the document
See CEA Section 5(d)(3), 7 U.S.C. 7(d)(3); Section 5(d)(4), 7 U.S.C. 7(d)(4); 17 C.F.R. 38.253 and 38.254(a), and Appendices B and C to Part 38 of the CFTC's regulations.

18Link to the location of the note in the document
CEA Section 5b(c)(2)(D)(iv), 7 U.S.C. 7a-1(c)(2)(D)(iv) ("The margin from each member and participant of a derivatives clearing organization shall be sufficient to cover potential exposures in normal market conditions.").

19Link to the location of the note in the document
In the case of CME and Cboe Bitcoin futures, the initial and maintenance margins were ultimately set at 47% and 44% by the respective DCOs. By way of comparison that is more than ten times the margin required for CME corn futures products.

20Link to the location of the note in the document
Unlike provisions in the CEA and Commission regulations that provide for public comment on rule self-certifications, there is no provision in statute or regulation for public input into CFTC staff review of product self-certifications. It is hard to believe that Congress was not deliberate in making that distinction.

21Link to the location of the note in the document
The CFTC has jurisdiction over retail foreign currency markets and retail commodity transactions that use leverage, margin or financing with some exceptions. Congress responded to concerns in the regulation of leveraged retail FX by providing the CFTC oversight responsibilities for Retail Foreign Exchange Dealers (RFEDs). The CFTC Re-authorization Act of 2008 amended the CEA to create a new registration category for RFEDs that include disclosure requirements and leverage limitations to customers.

22Link to the location of the note in the document
J. Christopher Giancarlo, Keynote Address of Commissioner J. Christopher Giancarlo before the Markit Group, 2016 Annual Customer Conference New York, May 10, 2016, http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-15.

23Link to the location of the note in the document
Id.

24Link to the location of the note in the document
See, e.g., Larry Greenemeier, Can't Touch This: New Encryption Scheme Targets Transaction Tampering, Scientific American, May 22, 2015, http://www.scientificamerican.com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/article/can-t-touch-this-new-encryption-scheme-targets-transaction-tampering/.

25Link to the location of the note in the document
See Massimo Morini & Robert Sams, Smart Derivatives Can Cure XVA Headaches, Risk Magazine, Aug. 27, 2015, http://www.risk.net/risk-magazine/opinion/2422606/-smart-derivatives-can-cure-xva-headaches; see also Jeffrey Maxim, UBS Bank Is Experimenting with "Smart-Bonds" Using the Bitcoin Blockchain, Bitcoin Magazine, June 12, 2015, https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/ubs-bank-experimenting-smart-bonds-using-bitcoin-blockchain-1434140571; see also Pete Harris, UBS Exploring Smart Bonds on Block Chain, Block Chain Inside Out, June 15, 2015, http://harris-on.typepad.com/block_chain_io/2015/06/ubs-exploring-smart-bonds-on-block-chain.html; See generally Galen Stops, Blockchain: Getting Beyond the Buzz, Profit & Loss, Aug.—Sept. 2015, at 20, http://www.profit-loss.com/articles/analysis/technology-analysis/blockchain-getting-beyond-the-buzz.

26Link to the location of the note in the document
See, e.g., Oversight of Dodd-Frank Act Implementation, U.S. House Financial Services Committee, http://financialservices.house.gov/dodd-frank/ (last visited Mar. 2, 2016).

27Link to the location of the note in the document
Santander InnoVentures, Oliver Wyman & Anthemis Group, The Fintech Paper 2.0: Rebooting Financial Services 15 (2015), http://santanderinnoventures.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/The-Fintech-2-0-Paper.pdf.

28Link to the location of the note in the document
Telis Demos, Bitcoin's Blockchain Technology Proves Itself in Wall Street Test, Apr. 7, 2016, The Wall Street Journal, http://www.wsj.com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/articles/bitcoins-blockchain-technology-proves-itself-in-wall-street-test-1460021421.

29Link to the location of the note in the document
Based on conversations with R3 CEV, http://r3cev.com/.

30Link to the location of the note in the document
Emiko Terazono, Commodities trader Louis Dreyfus turns to blockchainhttps, Financial Times, Jan. 22, 2018, www.ft.com/content/22b2ac1e-fd1a-11e7-a492-2c9be7f3120a.

31Link to the location of the note in the document
Frisco d'Anconia, IOTA Blockchain to Help Trace Families of Refugees During and After Conflicts, Cointelegraph.com, Aug. 8, 2017, https://cointelegraph.com/news/iota-blockchain-to-help-trace-families-of-refugees-during-and-after-conflicts.

32Link to the location of the note in the document
See supra note 22.

33Link to the location of the note in the document
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (See Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996))) and the ensuing Clinton administration "Framework for Global Electronic Commerce" (See Clinton administration, Framework for Global Electronic Commerce, http://clinton4.nara.gov/WH/New/Commerce/) established a simple and sensible framework: a) the private sector should play the leading role in innovation, development and financing; and b) governments and regulators should "do no harm" by avoiding undue restrictions, supporting a predictable, consistent and simple legal environment and respecting the "bottom-up" nature of the technology and its deployment in a global marketplace.

34Link to the location of the note in the document. BACKGROUND
Bitcoin is an electronically based and mathematically created currency, or cryptocurrency, which was invented by Satoshi Nakamoto,2Link to the text of the note following the publication of Satoshi Nakamoto's essay titled "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System" (https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf). Bitcoins are released into cyberspace according to a mathematically predetermined system. Under the current protocol, bitcoin [*3]  circulation will be capped at 21 million. A peer-to-peer user network regulates bitcoin, eliminating central entities such as banks. In addition, to ensure the legitimacy of transactions, individuals or entities called "miners" identify and verify the bitcoins used in the transactions. Miners block groups of these verified transactions together in "blockchains," recording the blockchains online on a shared public ledger. According to Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Cryptocurrencies (Andreas M. Antonopoulos [2014] [avail at http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1234000001802/ch01.html]), to which petitioner cites for various principles, the formulas and algorithms "form the basis of a digital money ecosystem" that can "do just about anything that can be done with conventional currencies, including buy and sell goods, send money to people or organizations, or extend credit" (Id., Chapter 1, Introduction: What is Bitcoin?).

According to respondents, the State legislature merged the State's banking and insurance departments, creating DFS, in 2011 in reaction to the 2008 financial crisis. The Financial Services Law (FSL) empowers DFS to regulate and supervise specified financial products [*4]  and services as well as those who provide them. Among other things, DFS used this power to create a regulation governing virtual money businesses (Title 23, Chapter 1, Part 200 of the NYCRR [the regulation]). The regulation went into effect on June 24, 2015.

The regulation defines virtual currency broadly, and includes all digital units of exchange that:

(1) have a centralized repository or administrator;

(2) are decentralized and have no centralized repository or administrator; or

(3) may be created or obtained by computing or manufacturing effort. Virtual currency shall not be construed to include any of the following:

(i) digital units that:

(a) are used solely within online gaming platforms;

(b) have no market or application outside of those gaming platforms;

(c) cannot be converted into, or redeemed for, Fiat Currency3Link to the text of the note

or Virtual Currency; and
(ii) may or may not be redeemable for real-world goods, services, discounts, or purchases; digital units that can be redeemed for goods, services, discounts, or purchases as part of a customer affinity or rewards program with the issuer and/or other designated merchants or can be redeemed for digital units in another customer affinity or rewards  [**3]  program; [*5]  or

(iii) digital units used as part of Prepaid Cards.

(Regulations of the Superintendent of Financial Services: Virtual Currency [23 NYCRR] § 200.2[p]).
Virtual currency business activity includes the following conduct involving New York or a resident of New York:

(1) receiving Virtual Currency for Transmission or Transmitting Virtual Currency, except where the transaction is undertaken for non-financial purposes and does not involve the transfer of more than a nominal amount of virtual currency;

(2) storing, holding, or maintaining custody or control of Virtual Currency on behalf of others;

(3) buying and selling Virtual Currency as a customer business;

(4) performing Exchange Services as a customer business; or

(5) controlling, administering, or issuing a Virtual Currency.

(Id., at § q).
In addition, pursuant to 23 NYCRR § 200.3(a), anyone engaged in virtual currency business activity must first obtain a license. The following section, 23 NYCRR § 200.4(a), states that the application, which must be accompanied by a $5,000 fee (see 23 NYCRR § 200.5), must include:

(1) the exact name of the applicant, including any doing business as name . . .;

(2) a list of all the applicant's Affiliates and an organization chart illustrating [their] relationship [to] the applicant [*6]  . . .;

(3) a list of . . . each individual applicant and each director . . . including such individual's name, physical and mailing addresses, and information and documentation regarding such individual's personal history, experience, and qualification, which shall be accompanied by a form of authority, executed by such individual, to release information to the Department;

(4) a background report prepared by an independent investigatory agency acceptable to the superintendent for each individual applicant, and each Principal Officer, Principal Stockholder, and Principal Beneficiary of the applicant, as applicable;

(5) for each individual applicant . . . and for all individuals to be employed by the applicant who have access to any customer funds, whether denominated in Fiat Currency or Virtual Currency:

(i) a set of completed fingerprints. . . for submission to the State Division of Criminal Justice Services and the Federal Bureau of Investigation;

(ii) if applicable, . . . processing fees [prescribed by the Superintendent] . . .; and

(iii) two portrait-style photographs of the individuals . . .;

(6) an organization chart of the applicant and its management structure . . .;

(7) a current financial [*7]  statement for the applicant and each Principal Officer, Principal Stockholder, and Principal Beneficiary of the applicant, as applicable, and a projected balance sheeting and income statement for the following year of the applicant's operation;

(8) a description of the proposed, current, and historical business of the applicant . . .;

(9) details of all banking arrangements;

(10) all written policies and procedures required . . .;

(11) an affidavit describing any pending or threatened [actions or proceedings of any kind]

(12) verification from the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance that the applicant is compliant with all . . . tax obligations . . .;

(13) . . . a copy of any insurance policies maintained for the benefit of the applicant, its directors or officers, or its customers;

(14) an explanation of the methodology used to calculate the value of Virtual Currency in Fiat Currency; and

(15) such other additional information as the superintendent may require.

A verification that the applicant has complied with the above requirements is considered part of the application (see id., § 200.4[b]). The Superintendent is required to rule on applications within 90 days from the date on which [*8]  the filing is "deemed by the superintendent to be complete" (See id., § 200.6[b]). The remaining provisions regulate the approved virtual currency business, requiring mandatory compliance with anti-money laundering rules, the maintenance of adequate books and records and the obligation to allow the Superintendent to inspect such records, minimum capitalization requirements, and the obligation to protect its customers' assets in several enumerated respects (See generally 23 NYCRR §§ 200.7-200.22).

According to petitioner, many of the requirements for virtual currency businesses do not exist in the rules applicable to "fiat currency transmitters" (Amended Verified Complaint and Article 78 Petition [Petition], ¶ 52]. These include the requirement that it maintain records of anti-money laundering programs for seven, as opposed to five, years; the requirement that it provide the identity and physical address of parties to transactions; and the requirement to report all transactions with an aggregate amount of more than $10,000. Petitioner claims that Superintendent Benjamin Lawsky, who held the position before the current Superintendent Maria T. Vullo, acknowledged that his goal was not in response to a pressing need and instead was intended to create [*9]  a working model for regulated banks and insurance companies.4Link to the text of the note



FACTS
On November 19, 2013, petitioner, a New York resident, incorporated Chino LTD (LTD) in Delaware. With the corporation, petitioner intended to set up a business in New York that was to install Bitcoin processing services in bodegas in New York State. He applied to conduct business in New York under Business Corporation Law § 1304, as an out-of-state corporation. In addition, in March 2014, he hired an employee to sell the LTD's services. On December 31, 2014, he co-founded Conglomerate Business Consultants, Inc. (CBC), which was incorporated in New York, and which purchased phone minutes and created phone calling cards the bodegas also could sell using LTD's bitcoin processing services. Petitioner submits copies of his tax returns showing that LTD lost $4,367 in 2013, $59,667 in 2015, and $30,588 in 2016. He alleges these losses are attributable to start-up costs including computer equipment, as well as marketing and other ongoing costs.

As the Court noted above (see supra, at p 3), the regulations governing virtual currency businesses became effective on June 24, 2015.5Link to the text of the note Petitioner applied for a Virtual Currency  [**4]  Business license on behalf of LTD on August 7, 2015. [*10]  Petitioner annexes a copy of the application as Exhibit IX to his petition. He provided the name but not the address of LTD. He did not provide an authorization as required by 23 NYCRR § 200.4(a)(3); instead, he wrote on the form that he did not authorize the release of information. He filled out some but not all financial information on the form requested, and he indicated that he had no insurance and kept no financial or accounting books. For his background report certification, he wrote: "[Could] not obtain in time." He filled out a personal information form but he refused to disclose his employment history for the last fifteen years, and he did not provide the names and addresses of past employers. He did not disclose whether he was employed by, performed services for, or had business connections with any agency or authority of the State of New York, or any institutions subject to DFS supervision. He stated he had no financial interest in any agency or authority in New York or any other state. He provided none of the required references. He stated that his high school, college, and professional or technical school information was not applicable. He refused to disclose his social security number. Along [*11]  with his application, he submitted a handwritten letter which requested a waiver of the $5,000 application fee based on his characterization of the size of the business, its budget, and its financial status.6Link to the text of the note

Petitioner initiated this proceeding, pro se, on October 16, 2015, before he received any response from DFS; he states that he did so because he realized "he would be required to incur expenses beyond his means to comply with the burdensome compliance costs under the Regulation" (Petition, ¶ 91). On January 4, 2016, DFS returned his August 7, 2015 application without processing it. The letter states that DFS could not evaluate the application because it contained "extremely limited" information and, among other things, did not describe the business in which LTD was or would be engaged and did not specify in what respect, if any, the business involved virtual currency (DFS Jan. 4, 2016 letter [Exh. XI to Petition]). The letter explained that because of this DFS could not determine whether LTD was a virtual currency business subject to the regulations. Petitioner states that CDC discontinued its bitcoin processing services at that time but LTD continued as a nonoperating business. [*12]  He states LTD lost $53,053 in 2016 because of its inability to provide bitcoin services. He provides tax returns for LTD for 2016 as well as for 2013-15 to substantiate his allegation that LTD lost money during these years.

The Ciric Law Firm, PLLC, appeared on behalf of petitioner on October 31, 2016. On May 26, 2017, the parties stipulated to convert the proceeding to e-filing. Accordingly, all papers submitted on or after that date are e-filed. Petitioner amended the action/proceeding around that time, and submitted a supplement summons on August 10, 2017. Respondent filed its notice of cross-motion and supporting papers on August 15, 2017.7Link to the text of the note The matter was argued before this Court on October 10, 2017, and the parties were directed to order and provide copies of the transcript, which they did the following week.



ARGUMENTS REGARDING STANDING
In their cross-motion, respondents first argue the threshold issue of standing. They point to the January 2016 letter of DFS, which not only stated that it could not determine whether LTD was engaged in a virtual currency business activity but that, by returning the application, DFS  [**5]  did not "offer any opinion as to whether. . . any business activity [*13]  of the Company requires or would require licensing by New York" (DFS Jan. 4, 2016 letter [Exh. XI to Petition]). The letter provided petitioner with contact information for the Supervising Bank Examiner for DFS' Capital Markets Division. Respondents state that after he received the letter, petitioner did not supplement the application, did not submit a new application for CBC, and did not contact the Supervising Bank Examiner or anyone else at DFS with questions. Instead, he treated the letter as a de facto denial of his application and shut down CBC.

Based on the facts in the petition and on the January 4, 2016 letter, respondents argue, petitioner has not shown standing. They note that petitioner has the burden to establish standing (Society of the Plastics Indus., Inc. v County of Suffolk, 77 NY2d 761, 769, 573 N.E.2d 1034, 570 N.Y.S.2d 778 [1991]) and that without standing, this matter is not justiciable (Roberts v Health & Hosp. Corp., 87 A.D.3d 311, 928 N.Y.S.2d 236 [1st Dept 2011]). The party must demonstrate an injury in fact — which, in turn, requires a showing of actual harm due to the administrative action (NY State Assoc. of Nurse Anesthetists v Novello, 2 NY3d 207, 214-15, 810 N.E.2d 405, 778 N.Y.S.2d 123 [2004] [Novello]). Actual harm, by definition, cannot be conjectural or ephemeral, and cannot be based on a general harm but must be specific to the individual or entity asserting the claim (Id.). Absent such a showing, the Court of Appeals has stated, the lawsuit is [*14]  "little more than an attempt to legislate through the courts" (Rudder v Pataki, 93 NY2d 273, 280, 711 N.E.2d 978, 689 N.Y.S.2d 701 [1999]).

According to respondents, petitioner's failure lies in his inability to demonstrate that he has suffered an injury in fact. He has not shown that he has or is likely to sustain a cognizable injury due to the regulation, they argue, because he submitted an incomplete license application which made adequate review impossible, he began his lawsuit before DFS responded to his application, and he did not attempt to pursue his application when DFS stated he had provided insufficient information to them and they could not evaluate his application. Petitioner cannot assert standing, respondents argue, before DFS even determined whether an application was required. Instead of proceeding with the application process, respondents state, petitioner "charted a decidedly different course by preemptively halting the operations of CBC and Chino LTD and commencing this litigation" (Mem. of Law in Support of Defendants'-Respondents' Cross-Motion to Dismiss the Amended Verified Complaint and Article 78 Petition [Respondents' Mem. in Support], at p 12). Petitioner's decision to shut down his businesses does not confer standing, respondents argue, because petitioner based his decision "on the speculative assumption that their operations might be impacted [*15]  by the Regulation" (Id. [emphasis in original]).

Furthermore, respondents argue that LTD's tax returns do not show any causal connection between the regulation and petitioner or LTD's financial losses, because the returns were for 2013 through 2015, and the regulation did not go into effect until the second half of the last of these three years. Thus, LTD's losses of $4,367 in 2013 and $59,667 in 2014 were entirely unrelated to the regulation. The losses of $30,588 in 2015 partly occurred prior to the effective date of the regulation and partly were due to litigation expenses. As for LTD's loss of $53,053 in 2016, respondents note that this purportedly was partly due to litigation expenses, partly because LTD remained an active business and retained its equipment operational in case it prevails in this lawsuit, and partly due to interest on the loan he used to establish his business. Respondents argue that "these losses plainly arise from [petitioner's] decision to challenge the legality of the Regulation before determining whether it even applied to his businesses, and cannot be plausibly attributed to the Regulation going into effect" (Id.).

In opposition, petitioner contends that [*16]  he has standing. He reiterates the arguments he set forth originally in support of his proceeding. He states that he commenced the petition/action before he received a determination from DFS because he could not afford the regulatory costs of running a virtual currency business, and that he did not respond to the January 4, 2016 letter he received from DFS "because I had already commenced this action in October 2015 and I knew this action could invalidate the Regulation. Therefore, I concluded that it was futile for me and for my business to continue the application process at this stage" (Theo Chino Aff. in Support of Opposition to Cross-Motion [Chino Aff.], at ¶ 16). He states that the January 4, 2016 "response from the Department" forced him "to abandon my Bitcoin processing business because my application was not approved" (Id., at ¶ 15 [emphasis supplied]). Petitioner further states that respondents have not submitted documentary evidence which refutes his statement of facts. Therefore, he states, the Court must accept his asserted facts as to standing as true and rule in his favor on this threshold issue. He states that he satisfies the two-pronged test the Court of Appeals set [*17]  forth in Novello (2 NY3d at 211). He states that the closure of his businesses demonstrates his actual harm because "it is reasonably certain that the harm will occur if the challenged action is permitted to continue" (Police Benevolent Ass'n of NY State Troopers, Inc. v Division of NY State Police, 29 A.D.3d 68, 70, 811 N.Y.S.2d 176 [3rd Dept 2006] [Police Benevolent Ass'n]). Citing New York Propane Gas Ass'n v NY State Dep't of State (17 AD3d 915, 916, 793 N.Y.S.2d 601 [3rd Dept 2005]), he argues that he need not quantify his loss with particularity. Furthermore, he asserts, the drastic increase in LTD's financial losses following the implementation of the regulations and its accompanying application process establishes a causal connection, and that his realization that the cost of compliance with the regulation would be prohibitive is causally connected to his decision to shutter his business. He states that he did not shut his business voluntarily but was compelled to do so by the burdens of the application process and the anticipated burden of compliance. He suggests that it was unnecessary for DFS to determine that his business qualified as a virtual currency business under the regulation because he, an expert in the field, knew that LTD was subject to the regulation.

Petitioner also claims standing with respect to his claim for declaratory relief. Relying on Plaza Health Clubs, Inc. v New York (76 AD2d 509, 430 N.Y.S.2d 815 [1st Dept 1980] [finding no standing because plaintiffs contended they did not [*18]  engage in any business activities proscribed by the statute]) for the proposition that the possible threat to his business activity is sufficient to confer standing with respect to this claim. The reasonable certainty of future harm, he states, is enough (Police Benevolent Ass'n, 29 A.D.3d at 70 [finding that standing existed because, due to the petitioners' violations of court orders and the court's warning that they would be held in contempt for their alleged misconduct, the asserted harm was more than speculative]).

In reply, respondents reiterate their earlier arguments. They emphasize that petitioner did not complete the application process or allow DFS to reach a final determination. They contend that petitioner's entire argument rests on the fallacy that DFS' January 4, 2016 letter constitutes a denial of petitioner's application. They challenge petitioner's proximate cause argument because petitioner stopped operating his business before DFS even determined that a license and the accompanying compliance requirements applied. DFS also did not order LTD to cease its operations, respondents point out. Moreover, they contend that petitioner's statement that compliance with the regulation would be unduly burdensome is [*19]  a speculative allegation regarding anticipatory harm.



DISCUSSION
After careful consideration, the Court concludes that petitioner has no right to commence an Article 78 proceeding and lacks standing to challenge the underlying regulation.



I. Petition
Petitioner did not complete LTD's application, and did not respond to DFS' January 2016 letter which notified him of his failure to do so. Petitioner acknowledges that he abandoned the application process because of the pendency of this hybrid action/proceeding challenging the regulation (Chino Aff. in Opp. To Cross-Motion, at ¶ 16). CPLR § 7803 provides a petitioner with a means to challenge "whether a determination was made in violation of lawful procedure, was affected by an error of law or was arbitrary and capricious or an abuse of discretion" (CPLR § 7803 [3]). Moreover, "one who objects to the acts of an administrative agency must exhaust available administrative remedies before being permitted to litigate in a court of law" (DiBlasio v Novello, 28 AD3d 339, 341, 814 N.Y.S.2d 51 [1st Dept 2006] [citations and internal quotation marks omitted]). Courts cannot "interject themselves into ongoing administrative proceedings until final resolution of those proceedings before the agency" (Id.). In the proceeding at hand, DFS did not [*20]  reach a final decision. Indeed, it did not reach any decision. Accordingly, there is nothing for this Court to review.

The Court notes that an exception exists to the exhaustion requirement when the action "is challenged as either unconstitutional or wholly beyond its grant of power, when resort to an administrative remedy would be futile or when its pursuit would cause irreparable injury" (Martinez 2001 v New York City Campaign Finance Bd., 36 AD3d 544, 548, 829 N.Y.S.2d 55 [1st Dept 2007]). The exception does not apply in this instance. Again, petitioner's failure to complete his application precludes him from raising this argument. Because of his failure, the agency did not take any action — constitutional or otherwise, and neither within nor exceeding its grant of power. The DFS letter stating more information was necessary is not an action or decision within the meaning of the governing law. Instead, it is the legislation itself that petitioner challenges here. Any irreparable injury petitioner alleges is a result of the underlying law and not of any agency action.

Moreover, even if an ultra vires or unconstitutional action were at issue, petitioner has not shown that DFS has caused it irreparable harm. LTD's tax returns show three-and-a-half years of losses prior to the initiation [*21]  of this action, and show comparable losses in 2014 — prior to the existence of the regulation — due to ongoing operation expenses. Petitioner attributes the 2016 losses to ongoing operation expenses and litigation costs resulting from this proceeding. Petitioner only shows one sale dated January 4, 2016 with a $279.41 invoice to support his contention regarding lost profits. Petitioner has not shown DFS would have determined the business was subject to the regulation. Although LTD appears to have engaged in a virtual currency business and petitioner claims that it was such a business, DFS never had the opportunity to evaluate the issue because petitioner did not provide it with most of the information it sought and the application obstructed DFS' efforts to obtain further information about him or LTD.

Similarly, petitioner's application for mandamus relief under Article 78 must fail. To the extent that he brings an Article 78 proceeding it is based on a challenge to DFS' action. Here, the purported action relates to petitioner's virtual currency business certification application. Not only did he fail to complete his application, but he does not seek an order mandating the granting [*22]  of the license. Instead, he challenges the underlying regulation. Article 78 is not the proper vehicle for a challenge to the constitutionality of a regulation ( [**6] Westhampton Beach Assoc., LLC v Village of Westhampton Beach, 151 A.D.3d 793, 56 N.Y.S.3d 518 [2nd Dept 2017]).



II. Action
Next, the Court examines the question of whether petitioner has standing to challenge the constitutionality of the regulation. This presents a much closer issue than that of his Article 78 proceeding. To establish standing, a plaintiff must show injury in fact, which, "[a]s the term itself implies, . . . must be more than conjectural" (Quast v Westchester County Bd. of Elections, 155 AD3d 674, 674, 64 N.Y.S.3d 59 [2nd Dept 2017]). In addition, the plaintiff must establish that he or she falls within the zone of interest which the regulation impacts (See id.). Moreover, "personal disagreement and speculative financial loss are insufficient to confer standing" (Roulan v County of Onondaga, 21 N.Y.3d 902, 905, 989 N.E.2d 6, 966 N.Y.S.2d 744 [2013] [rejecting plaintiff's standing argument that he sustained financial harm because challenged plan caused him to be assigned fewer criminal cases]; see New York State Psychiatric Assoc., Inc. v Mills, 29 AD3d 1058, 1059, 814 N.Y.S.2d 382 [3rd Dept 2006] [asserted financial harm to psychiatrists was speculative]). The issue of standing, when applicable, must be considered at the outset of the litigation (Society of Plastics Indus. v County of Suffolk, 77 NY2d 761, 769, 573 N.E.2d 1034, 570 N.Y.S.2d 778 [1991]). If there is no standing, a court cannot issue a declaration as to the validity of a regulation (See Roulan, 21 N.Y.3d at 905).

In the proper [*23]  circumstances, the argument that a regulation imposes "an unacceptable burden" on an individual or business is sufficient to establish standing (See Doe v Axelrod, 136 AD2nd 410, 527 N.Y.S.2d 385 [1st Dept 1988] [concerning regulations on pharmaceutical and medical professions that allegedly interfered with ability to provide medical case, invaded patients' privacy, and violated interstate commerce clause]). If, for example, this matter involved the issue of organizational standing, or, as in Doe v Axelrod, a large coalition of business owners who showed harm to their business under the regulation, or an individual or business that could show the probability of financial harm, there might be a strong argument in favor of standing. Here, however, petitioner did not apply for certification,8Link to the text of the note and has not shown sufficient economic loss. Any argument as to the $5,000 application fee was waived because petitioner did not pay the fee or pursue the application. His economic loss argument is otherwise insufficient because LTD has never made a profit and petitioner showed proof of only one $279.41 sale. Moreover, its losses in 2016, once petitioner thought LTD was subject to the regulation, are not inconsistent with LTD's prior financial history.



III. Motion [*24]  for Limited Discovery
Petitioner's motion for limited discovery is denied as moot. The discovery petitioner requested included depositions of Nobel Prize-winning New York Times columnist Paul Krugman and former DFS chair Benjamin Lawsky, and any documentary evidence relevant to respondents' conclusion that bitcoin is a financial product or service within the meaning of the regulation. None of the proposed discovery relates to the standing issue. Moreover, the Court notes that even if it had reached the issue of whether bitcoin should be governed by the regulation, it would have concluded that this discovery was unwarranted. It was not necessary to depose Paul Krugman and Benjamin Lasky, or to examine the entire history behind DFS'  [**7]  determination that bitcoin is a financial product governed by the regulation. Instead, the issue is the impact of the regulation on petitioner and other virtual currency businesses, and the discovery he seeks is not relevant to that issue. Petitioner has not provided — or argued that he attempted to provide — any pertinent evidence supporting this critical contention.



CONCLUSION
For the reasons above, the Court need not reach the other issues. Accordingly, [*25]  it is

ORDERED that the cross-motion to dismiss which is part of motion sequence number 001 is granted and therefore the petition, also part of motion sequence number 001, is dismissed; and it is further

ORDERED that motion sequence number 003, which seeks limited pre-joinder discovery, is denied as moot.

Dated: December 21, 2017

CARMEN VICTORIA ST. GEORGE, J.S.C.

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Chino refers to this as a "cross-motion," but it is a separately filed motion. The Court also has before it pleadings and documents filed by Chino prior to his retention of counsel, but they are not relevant to the resolution of the cross-motion

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Nakamoto is a pseudonym, and the actual identity of the author remains unknown.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Fiat Currency includes any currency that is recognized by the government as legal tender but is not backed by a physical commodity such as gold.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
For the purposes of this order, the Court need not address the accuracy of this statement.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
In advance of the regulation's effective date, between November 2014 and June 2015, petitioner filed several Freedom of Information Law requests, hoping to clarify DFS' "process for framing the Regulation" (Petition, ¶ 62). According to the petition, DFS did not provide any information, stating the material either did not exist or was exempt from disclosure.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
The petition refers to this as a request for a fee waiver under Banking Law § 18-a(6)(a).

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Respondents previously had cross-moved in response to the original pleadings.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
The application form he submits here, with so much of the critical information absent and without allowing for further examination by DFS, cannot be considered an application, especially when petitioner abandoned his attempt to obtain certification prior to his receipt of the DFS January 2016 letter.  that "the XRP offered and sold by defendants have all the traditional hallmarks of a security" and in fact is a security within the meaning of Securities Act of 1933 (the "Securities Act") and/or the California Corporations Code. Compl. ¶¶ 100-111, 133, 136, 139, 143. Accordingly, plaintiff contends that defendants "never ending ICO" constituted an unregistered sale of securities in violation of the Securities Act and the California Corporations Code.

On behalf of "all persons or entities who purchased XRP from January 1, 2013 through the present," Compl. ¶ 122, plaintiff asserts four causes of action for: (1) violation of §§ 5 & 12(a)(1) of the Securities Act for the unregistered offer and sale of securities; (2) violation of Cal. Corp. Code §§ 25110 & 25503 for the unregistered offer and sale of securities; (3) violation of § 15 of the Securities Act (control person liability); and (4) violation of Cal. Corp. Code § 25504 (control person liability). Plaintiff seeks, inter alia, rescission of all XRP purchases, damages, and a constructive trust over the proceeds of defendants' alleged sales of XRP. Compl. at 29-30.



DISCUSSION
That said, the present [*4]  motion and this order address a narrow issue: Whether the presence of Securities Act claims bars a defendant from removing an action pursuant to § 1453 based on state law claims that independently satisfy CAFA's jurisdictional requirements. The court believes that this is an issue of first impression. The parties candidly admit that their research failed to turn up any case directly addressing this question and the court's own research fared no better.

The parties agree that absent plaintiff's Securities Act claims, defendants could properly remove this action under CAFA based on plaintiff's state law claims.1Link to the text of the note Plaintiff, however, argues that § 22(a) of the Securities Act operates as a complete bar on removing any action that includes a Securities Act claim. See 15 U.S.C. § 77v(a) ("§ 22"). Defendant responds that plaintiff's state law claims satisfy CAFA and therefore the entire action may be removed pursuant to § 1453, regardless of § 22(a)'s removal bar.



A. Legal Standard

1. Removal, Remand, and the Class Action Fairness Act
The right to remove a case to federal court is entirely a creature of statute. See Libhart v. Santa Monica Dairy Co., 592 F.2d 1062, 1064 (9th Cir. 1979). In general, the Ninth Circuit "strictly construe[s] the removal statute against removal jurisdiction," and "[f]ederal jurisdiction [*5]  must be rejected if there is any doubt as to the right of removal in the first instance." Gaus v. Miles, Inc., 980 F.2d 564, 566 (9th Cir. 1992) (discussing 28 U.S.C. § 1441). "The 'strong presumption' against removal jurisdiction means that the defendant always has the burden of establishing that removal is proper." Id. If a defendant fails to meet this burden, the action must be remanded.

Under § 1441(a), sometimes referred to the general removal statute, "a defendant generally may invoke federal removal jurisdiction if the case could have been filed in federal court." 16 James Wm. Moore et al., Moore's Federal Practice - Civil § 107.03 (2018). Such removal is usually grounded in either federal question jurisdiction or diversity jurisdiction—an action between citizens of different states that involves an amount in controversy that exceeds $75,000. See id.; see also 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 (defining federal question jurisdiction), 1332(a) (defining one type of diversity), 1441 ("Removal of Civil Actions"). Section 1441(a) states:

Generally.--Except as otherwise expressly provided by Act of Congress, any civil action brought in a State court of which the district courts of the United States have original jurisdiction, may be removed by the defendant or the defendants, to the district court of the United States for the district and division [*6]  embracing the place where such action is pending.

28 U.S.C. § 1441(a) (underlining added, "§ 1441(a)'s except clause"); see also 28 U.S.C. § 1441(b) ("Removal based on diversity jurisdiction.").
CAFA "relaxed" the diversity requirements for putative class actions. See Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co., LLC v. Owens, 135 S. Ct. 547, 551, 190 L. Ed. 2d 495 (2014). Contrary to the Ninth Circuit's general rule for removal, "[n]o antiremoval presumption attends cases invoking CAFA, which Congress enacted to facilitate adjudication of certain class actions in federal court." Id. at 554. Pursuant to CAFA, a defendant may remove an action under § 1453 if the amount in controversy exceeds $5 million, the putative class has more than 100 members, and the parties are minimally diverse. Id. at 552; 28 U.S.C. §§ 1332(d), 1453. Section 1453(b) states:

In general. -- A class action may be removed to a district court of the United States in accordance with section 1446 (except that the 1-year limitation under section 1446(c)(1) shall not apply), without regard to whether any defendant is a citizen of the State in which the action is brought, except that such action may be removed by any defendant without the consent of all defendants.

28 U.S.C. § 1453(b). In addition, as discussed below, § 1453(d) sets forth three exceptions to removal under § 1453.


2. The Securities Act of 1933
The Securities Act's "jurisdictional provision" is codified at Section 22(a). See Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, 138 S. Ct. 1061, 1068, 200 L. Ed. 2d 332 (2018). As relevant here, that [*7]  section states:

(a) The district courts of the United States and United States courts of any Territory shall have jurisdiction of offenses and violations under this title and under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Commission in respect thereto, and, concurrent with State and Territorial courts, except as provided in 77p [§ 16] of this title with respect to covered class actions, of all suits in equity and actions at law brought to enforce any liability or duty created by this subchapter. . . . Except as provided in 77p(c) [§ 16(c)], no case arising under this subchapter and brought in any State court of competent jurisdiction shall be removed to any court of the United States.

15 U.S.C. § 77v(a). The first clause states that both state and federal courts have concurrent jurisdiction over non-§ 16 Securities Act claims. See Cyan, 138 S. Ct. at 1068-70. The second clause, § 22(a)'s "removal bar," generally prohibits the removal—at least under the Securities Act—of cases arising under the Securities Act, except as allowed by § 16(c). See id. at 1066, 1068
Though the § 16 exceptions factor into the analysis below, the parties agree that § 16 does not apply to this section. Rightly so. Section 16(b) "completely disallows (in both state and federal courts) sizable class actions that are founded [*8]  on state law and allege dishonest practices respecting" the purchase or sale of a nationally traded security listed on a national stock exchange. Cyan, 138 S. Ct. at 1067. Section 16(c) provides for the removal of those actions, so that state law claims precluded by § 16(b) can be dismissed. Id. at 1067-68; see also Kircher v. Putnam Funds Trust, 547 U.S. 633, 644, 126 S. Ct. 2145, 165 L. Ed. 2d 92 (2006). Regardless of whether XRP is a "security," the parties agree that none of plaintiff's claims meet the other requirements of § 16(b). That agreement places the action outside of § 16(c)'s purview and outside of § 22(a)'s removal bar's lone exception. Thus, as relevant here, § 22(a)'s removal bar remains in play.



B. Analysis

1. Cyan, Kircher, and Luther Do Not Require Remand
Though plaintiff concedes that he could find no case on all fours with the present situation, plaintiff argues that two Supreme Court cases and the Ninth Circuit's decision in Luther v. Countrywide Home Loans Servicing LP, 533 F.3d 1031 (9th Cir. 2008), require this court to remand the action to state court. The court disagrees.

As an initial matter, the two Supreme Court cases, Kircher v. Putnam Funds Trust, 547 U.S. 633, 644, 126 S. Ct. 2145, 165 L. Ed. 2d 92 (2006), and Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, 138 S. Ct. 1061, 200 L. Ed. 2d 332 (2018), have nothing to do with CAFA.2Link to the text of the note The former addressed the single question of "whether an order remanding a case removed under Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act ["SLUSA"] is appealable notwithstanding [28 U.S.C.] § 1447(d)." Kircher, 547 U.S. at 636. The latter addressed two questions: (i) "did SLUSA strip state courts [*9]  of jurisdiction over class actions alleging violations of only the Securities Act" and (ii) "did SLUSA empower defendants to remove such actions from state court to federal court." Cyan, 138 S. Ct. at 1066. Those three issues have no bearing on removability under CAFA.

Luther, on the other hand, addressed both CAFA and § 22(a), and is a closer question. In Luther, the Ninth Circuit considered whether an action that solely alleged Securities Act claims could be removed under CAFA. Luther, 533 F.3d at 1032, 1034. Luther reasoned that because § 22(a) dealt "with a narrow, precise, and specific subject" that "applie[d] only to claims arising under the Securities Act" it was "not submerged by [CAFA,] a later enacted statute covering a more generalized spectrum of class actions." Id. at 1034. Thus, Luther held that, "by virtue of § 22(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, [plaintiff's] state court class action alleging only violations of the Securities Act of 1933 was not removable." Id. (emphasis added); but see Katz v. Gerardi, 552 F.3d 558, 561-62 (7th Cir. 2009) (discussing Luther and holding the opposite); New Jersey Carpenters Vacation Fund v. HarborView Mortg. Loan Tr. 2006-4, 581 F. Supp. 2d 581, 585-88 (S.D.N.Y. 2008) (same).

The present situation is dissimilar. Here, plaintiff alleges claims under both California law and the Securities [*10]  Act. More importantly, defendants did not remove this action based on the Securities Act claim satisfying CAFA's requirements—likely a losing proposition under Luther. Instead, defendants removed this action based on plaintiff's California claims, which independently satisfy CAFA's requirements. Luther says nothing about that situation.

In addition, part of Luther's reasoning has been undermined by the Supreme Court's decision in Dart Cherokee. The Luther court relied on the Ninth Circuit's general rule that "removal statutes are strictly construed against removal," and that "any doubt is resolved against removability." Luther, 533 F.3d at 1034. The Supreme Court has subsequently rejected that premise. Noting that the district court's remand order relied on the same faulty premise, the Court determined "that no antiremoval presumption attends cases invoking CAFA, which Congress enacted to facilitate adjudication of certain class actions in federal court." Dart Cherokee, 135 S. Ct. at 554 (vacating 10th Circuit's decision denying review of district court's remand order). One year later, the Ninth Circuit recognized that Dart Cherokee undermines Luther's reasoning on that point. See Jordan v. Nationstar Mortg. LLC, 781 F.3d 1178, 1183 n.2 (9th Cir. 2015) (citing Luther and stating "We are not bound by our [*11]  court's prior rulings" because "Dart Cherokee undercut[s] the theory or reasoning underlying the prior circuit precedent in such a way that the cases are clearly irreconcilable." (quotation marks omitted)). And one authority has suggested that Dart Cherokee's "assertion that no antiremoval presumption applies to cases removed under CAFA," calls into question Luther's holding regarding § 22(a) and § 1453. See Moore et al., 16 Moore's Federal Practice - Scope of Removal, § 107.91[1][b] (2018).



2. The Role of Removal Provisions
With no directly applicable authority, the court first turns to reviewing how removal provisions operate generally, outside the context of the disputed statutes. As noted, "[t]he right to remove a case from state to federal court is purely statutory, being dependent on the will of Congress." Wright and Miller, 20 Fed. Prac. & Proc. Deskbook § 40, Scope of the Removal Jurisdiction (2018). That is, a defendant must point to some statute that allows the defendant to deprive the plaintiff of her choice of forum. See id. ("[I]n addition to the general removal statute," § 1441(a), "there are certain other statutes authorizing removal . . .").

If a defendant is, for example, faced with a claim under the federal [*12]  Fair Labor Standards Act, the defendant may remove the action under § 1441(a). That is because § 1441(a), subject to its except clause, allows for removal of "any civil action" that the U.S. district courts have original jurisdiction over—such as a claim asserting a violation of a federal statute. See 28 U.S.C. § 1331. Similarly, if § 1332(a)'s general diversity jurisdiction requirements are met, then a defendant may remove the action under § 1441(a), so long as the removal also complies with § 1441(b). See 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a); 28 U.S.C. § 1441(b) (providing additional guidance for removal based on jurisdiction under § 1332(a)). That is uncontroversial.

It is also uncontroversial that the defendants in the above situations may successfully remove the action without satisfying the requirements of other inapplicable removal provisions. That is, a defendant removing an action under § 1441(a) based on federal question jurisdiction, defined by § 1331, need not show that diversity jurisdiction, defined by § 1332, also exists. Or, put another way, the federal question plaintiff cannot defeat removal by arguing that the defendant has not complied with § 1441(b) or met § 1332's diversity jurisdiction requirements. Those two sections are inapplicable when removing based on federal question jurisdiction. The converse, of course, is also [*13]  true. A defendant may remove an action based on diversity jurisdiction even if the action does not present a federal question. Indeed, that is the very purpose of diversity jurisdiction.

The same is true for a foreign state defendant removing a civil action under § 1441(d).3Link to the text of the note That defendant may remove the action if it meets the requirements of subsection (d), regardless of whether the removal complies with subsections (a) or (b). And the plaintiff in that case could not defeat removal by pointing to §§ 1331, 1332, 1441(a), or (b). Teledyne, Inc. v. Kone Corp., 892 F.2d 1404, 1407, 1409 (9th Cir. 1989) (action not removable under federal question jurisdiction or § 1332 but removable under § 1441(d); "Congress explicitly drafted subsection 1441(d) as a provision to which the generally-applicable rules of removal do not apply.").

Section 1441 is hardly unique in that regard. The other statutes authorizing removal also operate independently. For example, § 1442(a) and (b) authorize removal of actions against certain federal officers or agencies. Nothing in § 1442 directs a removing defendant to comply with any part of § 1441 and, accordingly, a defendant may remove the action without meeting the diversity, federal question, or foreign state jurisdictional requirements. See, e.g., Leite v. Crane Co., 749 F.3d 1117, 1120, 1122, 1124 (9th Cir. 2014) (removal of action alleging only state law tort claims proper under § 1442, recognizing that "defendants [*14]  enjoy much broader removal rights under" § 1442 "than they do under" § 1441). The same goes for removal under § 1442a (actions against members of the armed forces), § 1443 (certain civil rights actions), § 1452 (claims related to bankruptcy cases), and § 1454 (patent & copyright cases)—a defendant may remove claims or actions under these sections regardless of the requirements set forth in any other removal provision. See, e.g., Mir v. Fosburg, 646 F.2d 342, 344 (9th Cir. 1980) ("Our holding can be stated simply: unlike removal pursuant to [§ 1441], a district court has jurisdiction to hear an action removed pursuant to [§ 1442a] even if the initial action could not have been commenced by the plaintiff in a federal forum."); Sec. Farms v. Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters, Chauffers, Warehousemen & Helpers, 124 F.3d 999, 1010 (9th Cir. 1997) ("The purpose of section 1452 is to enlarge a trial court's power to remove or remand a claim related to a bankruptcy case."); Carrabus v. Schneider, 111 F. Supp. 2d 204, 207 (E.D.N.Y. 2000) (action removed pursuant to one jurisdictional statute made "consideration of the alternative bases for removal superfluous.").

It is also worth noting that statutes authorizing removal also appear outside of Title 28. See also, e.g.,12 U.S.C. § 1819(b)(2)(B) (removal provision for actions involving the FDIC). Section 16(c) of the Securities Act is one such provision. See, e.g., Kircher, 547 U.S. at 643-44 ("[R]emoval jurisdiction under subsection (c) is understood to be restricted to precluded actions defined by subsection (b)."); Cyan, 138 S. Ct. at 1076 (same). [*15]  Just like the above-discussed removal provisions, § 16(c) provides an independent basis for removal. If a defendant wishes to remove state law claims precluded by § 16(b) of the Securities Act, the defendant need only comply with § 16(c). The defendant does not need to comply with, for example, § 1441, or any other provision authorizing removal.4Link to the text of the note The converse also works. A defendant cannot remove a non-§ 16 Securities Act action under § 1441(a) because that subsection states "Except as otherwise expressly provided by Act of Congress." As such, § 22(a)—barring removal of non-§ 16 Securities Act actions—prevents defendant from fully complying with § 1441(a).

The point being, a defendant may successfully remove an action from state to federal court by pointing to and complying with a statutory basis for removal, not every statutory basis for removal. See, e.g., Mir, 646 F.2d at 344; Leite, 749 F.3d at 1122; see also Lanier v. Norfolk S. Corp., No. 1:05-3476-MBS, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 49052, 2006 WL 1878984, at *1 (D.S.C. July 5, 2006), aff'd, 256 F. App'x 629 (4th Cir. 2007) (denying motion to remand, though defendant failed to show removal was proper under § 1331, § 1332, or § 1442(a)(1), removal was proper under § 1453). Implicitly applying that rule, numerous cases have held antiremoval provisions do not prohibit removal under non-§ 1441(a) removal provisions. See, e.g., Emrich v. Touche Ross & Co., 846 F.2d 1190, 1197-98 (9th Cir. 1988) (explaining that § 22(a) prohibited removal of Securities [*16]  Act claim under § 1441(a), but did not prohibit removal under prior version of subsection (c), though that subsection's other requirements were not met); Escobar v. Celebration Cruise Operator, Inc., 805 F.3d 1279, 1293 (11th Cir. 2015) (Jones Act antiremoval provision did not bar removal under 9 U.S.C. § 205, which provided for removal of certain actions involving arbitration agreements); California Pub. Employees' Ret. Sys. v. WorldCom, Inc., 368 F.3d 86, 106 (2d Cir. 2004) (comparing § 1452 to § 1441(a) and concluding that § 22(a) did not bar removal pursuant to § 1452); Pac. Life Ins. Co. v. J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14705, 2003 WL 22025158, at *2 (C.D. Cal. June 30, 2003) (same, "Section 22(a) proscribes removal based on federal question jurisdiction under [§ 1441(a)], but does not prevent removal based on other grounds."); Henry v. Kansas City S. Ry. Co., No. CIV.A. 10-00469, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 68354, 2010 WL 2740016, at *5-6 (W.D. La. July 9, 2010) (removal under § 1452(a) proper despite § 1445(a)'s antiremoval provision); FDIC v. Countrywide Financial Corp., 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 189227, 2012 WL 12897152, at *1-2 (C.D. Cal. Mar. 20, 2012) (§ 22(a) did not bar removal pursuant to pre-2011 § 1441(b), which provides an independent basis for removal and "does not echo § 1441(a)'s deference to removal bars").



3. Section 1453's Text
With that background, the court turns to § 1453. "As with any question of statutory interpretation, [a court's] analysis begins with the plain language of the statute. [W]hen deciding whether the language is plain, [courts] must read the words in their context and with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme. If the statutory language is plain, we must enforce the statute according to its terms." Rainero v. Archon Corp., 844 F. 3d 832, 837 (9th Cir. 2016) (additions in original, internal citations and [*17]  quotation marks omitted). "If the plain meaning of the statute is unambiguous, that meaning is controlling and [the court] need not examine legislative history as an aid to interpretation unless the legislative history clearly indicates that Congress meant something other than what it said." Yocupicio v. PAE Grp., LLC, 795 F.3d 1057, 1060 (9th Cir. 2015) (interpreting CAFA).

It bears repeating, CAFA's removal provision, § 1453(b), states:

In general.--A class action may be removed to a district court of the United States in accordance with section 1446 (except that the 1-year limitation under section 1446(c)(1) shall not apply), without regard to whether any defendant is a citizen of the State in which the action is brought, except that such action may be removed by any defendant without the consent of all defendants.

Put simply, a CAFA-qualifying class action may be removed by any defendant.5Link to the text of the note
Section 1453(d) specifically excepts certain actions from removal under § 1453:

Exception.—This section shall not apply to any class action that solely involves—

(1) a claim concerning a covered security as defined under section 16(f)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77p(f)(3)) and section 28(f)(5)(E) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78bb(f)(5)(E));

(2) a claim that relates to the internal affairs or governance of a corporation or other form of business enterprise and [*18]  arises under or by virtue of the laws of the State in which such corporation or business enterprise is incorporated or organized; or

(3) a claim that relates to the rights, duties (including fiduciary duties), and obligations relating to or created by or pursuant to any security (as defined under section 2(a)(1) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77b(a)(1)) and the regulations issued thereunder).

That is, if an action "solely" alleges a claim falling into one of the three exceptions, then the action may not be removed under CAFA. Such an action, however, might be removable under some other removal statute. For example, a defendant could remove a state law class action involving a covered security, as defined under § 16(f)(3), pursuant to § 16(c) of the Securities Act, notwithstanding § 1453(d)(1)'s prohibition.

Thus, read as a whole, CAFA's plain language "creates original jurisdiction for and removability of all class actions that meet the minimal requirements and do not fall under one of the limited exceptions."6Link to the text of the note HarborView, 581 F. Supp. 2d at 584 (emphasis in original). Accordingly, § 1453's plain language suggests that defendant properly removed this action based on plaintiff's state law claims that independently satisfy CAFA's requirements.

Because § 1453's plain language [*19]  is unambiguous, the court need not address CAFA's purpose or legislative history. Those considerations, however, also support the conclusion that defendants properly removed this action. The Supreme Court has explained that CAFA's " 'provisions should be read broadly, with a strong preference that interstate class actions should be heard in a federal court if properly removed by any defendant.'" Dart Cherokee, 135 S. Ct. at 554 (discussing legislative history and quoting S. Rep. No. 109-14 at 43 (2005)); Standard Fire Ins. Co. v. Knowles, 568 U.S. 588, 595, 133 S. Ct. 1345, 185 L. Ed. 2d 439 (2013) ("CAFA's primary objective" is to "ensur[e] Federal court consideration of interstate cases of national importance." (internal quotation marks omitted)). "The Senate Report on CAFA explains that '[b]ecause interstate class actions typically involve more people, more money, and more interstate commerce ramifications than any other type of lawsuit, the Committee firmly believes that such cases properly belong in federal court.'" Jordan, 781 F.3d at 1182 (quoting S. Rep. No. 109-14 at 5). There can be little doubt that the present action—involving a proposed international class and issues of first impression regarding the federal securities laws applicability to a nascent technology—falls into that category of class actions.

In addition, "Congressional [*20]  sponsors of the bill repeatedly emphasized the breadth of CAFA, while insisting that each exception must be construed narrowly." HarborView, 581 F. Supp. 2d at 585 (citing S.Rep. 109-14 at 45 and discussing legislative history); see also Westerfeld v. Indep. Processing, LLC, 621 F.3d 819, 822 (8th Cir. 2010) ("CAFA grants broad federal jurisdiction over class actions and establishes narrow exceptions to such jurisdiction." (citing S. Rep. No. 109-14 at 43)). That accords with the narrow exceptions enumerated in subsection (d) and the corresponding absence of any indication of deference to other acts of Congress—a deference that would significantly expand the types of class actions exempt from removal under § 1453.

Despite that notable absence of any reference to antiremoval statutes, plaintiff argues that removal is barred because the above analysis fails to take into account § 22(a)'s removal bar. However, the court declines plaintiff's invitation to essentially read § 1441(a)'s except clause into § 1453 because doing so would contradict the general independence of removal provisions, CAFA's purpose, and render numerous statutory provisions superfluous.



4. Section 1441(a)'s Except Clause Compared to § 1453(d)
Unlike § 1453, § 1441(a) does not enumerate three specific exceptions to its removal purview, but instead broadly states: "Except as otherwise expressly provided by Act of Congress, any [*21]  civil action [for which original jurisdiction would exist]. . . may be removed." That is, unless some other federal statute says otherwise, the action may be removed under § 1441(a) if the district court would have had original jurisdiction. The underlying premise of plaintiff's argument is that a similarly broad exception applies to § 1453. That reading does not comport with the plain language of either statute or the overall statutory scheme.

Both prior to and after CAFA's enactment in 2005, courts have interpreted § 1441(a)'s broad except clause as a reference to antiremoval provisions in other federal statutes. See above at Part B.2. (compiling cases); see also, e.g., Cacioppe v. Superior Holsteins III, Ltd., 650 F. Supp. 607, 608 (S.D. Tex. 1986) (§ 1441(a)'s except clause "provides for recognition of statutory anti-removal provisions," such as § 22(a)); Farmers & Merchants Bank v. Hamilton Hotel Partners of Jacksonville Ltd. P'ship, 702 F. Supp. 1417, 1419 (W.D. Ark. 1988) (§ 1441(a) except clause "is clearly a reference to statutes such as the one involved here," § 22(a), and listing other antiremoval statutes); Perez v. Hornbeck Offshore Transp., LLC, No. 10 CV 1402 SJ MDG, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 46114, 2011 WL 1636244, at *2 (E.D.N.Y. Apr. 28, 2011) (remanding because § 1445(a)'s removal bar prohibited removal under § 1441(a) because of the except clause). Thus, both pre and post-CAFA decisions hold that actions alleging Securities Act claims cannot be removed under § 1441(a) because of § 22(a)'s removal bar. See, e.g., U.S. Indus. v. Gregg, 348 F. Supp. 1004, 1015-16 (D. Del. 1972), rev'd on other grounds, 540 F.2d 142 (3d Cir. 1976) [*22]  (concluding that action arising under the Securities Act could not be removed under subsection (a)); Liu v. Xoom Corp., No. 15-CV-00602-LHK, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 82830, 2015 WL 3920074, at *1-5 (N.D. Cal. June 25, 2015) (remanding Securities Act class action removed under § 1441(a) because of § 22(a)).

Despite knowing exactly how to make a removal provision subordinate to antiremoval statutes, Congress chose not to do so for § 1453. Instead, Congress chose to enumerate only three specific exceptions to removal under § 1453. The absence of § 1441(a)'s except clause, or anything even resembling it, weighs heavily against reading such a broad exception into § 1453. See United States v. Providence J. Co., 485 U.S. 693, 704-05, 705 n.9, 108 S. Ct. 1502, 99 L. Ed. 2d 785 (1988) (observing that when two statutes included "[e]xcept as otherwise authorized by law," but that "by way of vivid contrast," the third did not, the third statute provided for no exception); see also WorldCom, 368 F.3d at 105-06 (applying same reasoning and holding that § 22(a) did not prohibit removal under § 1452(a)); Cobalt Partners, LP v. Sunedison, Inc., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 115003, 2016 WL 4488181, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 26, 2016) (same).

Moreover, "[t]he general rule of statutory construction is that the enumeration of specific exclusions from the operation of a statute is an indication that the statute should apply to all cases not specifically excluded." Blausey v. United States Tr., 552 F.3d 1124, 1133 (9th Cir. 2009). That rule applies with even more force here because, along with excepting certain state law claims that no party argues are relevant here, CAFA explicitly excepts certain Securities Act-related claims from § 1453. 28 U.S.C. § 1453(d) (excepting certain claims related to [*23]  § 16(f)(3) & § 2(a)(1) of the Securities Act). That Congress considered and excepted one part of the Securities Act but did not reference § 22(a), strongly suggests that the court should not read additional Securities Act exceptions into CAFA. See HarborView, 581 F. Supp. 2d at 587 ("These circumscribed exceptions coupled with the overriding purpose of CAFA to provide for federal court jurisdiction in cases of national importance illustrate the intent of Congress to include within the reach of CAFA all securities class actions except" those specifically excepted.).

Relatedly, § 1453 directly addresses what should occur if plaintiff alleges claims removable under 1453(b) and a claim excepted under § 1453(d)—a possibly more difficult situation than that presented here. In that situation, § 1453 unambiguously allows removal. 28 U.S.C. § 1453(d) ("This section shall not apply to any class action that solely involves" an excepted claim.); Tuttle v. Sky Bell Asset Mgmt., LLC, No. C 10-03588 WHA, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 7466, 2011 WL 208060, at *5 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 21, 2011) ("If a complaint contains a claim implicating one of CAFA's exceptions, but also involves other non-excepted claims, the case should remain in federal court." (emphasis omitted)). It would be incongruent to hold that an action alleging both a specifically excepted claim and a CAFA-removable claim may be removed, [*24]  while simultaneously holding that a non-referenced, non-excepted claim prohibits removal of the same action.

The Supreme Court's analysis of § 1441(a)'s except clause provides further support that the clause should not be read into all removal provisions. In Breuer v. Jim's Concrete of Brevard, Inc., 538 U.S. 691, 693, 697, 123 S. Ct. 1882, 155 L. Ed. 2d 923 (2003), the Court considered whether § 216(b) of the Fair Labor Standards Act operated as an antiremoval provision barring removal under § 1441(a). The Court held that it did not because "[w]hile § 216(b) provides that an action 'may be maintained . . . in any . . . State court of competent jurisdiction,' the word 'maintain' enjoys a breadth of meaning that leaves its bearing on removal ambiguous at best." Breuer v. Jim's Concrete of Brevard, Inc., 538 U.S. 691, 694-95, 123 S. Ct. 1882, 155 L. Ed. 2d 923 (2003) (ellipses in original). The court emphasized that "the need to take the express exception requirement [of § 1441(a)] seriously, is underscored by examples of indisputable prohibitions of removal in a number of other statutes. . . . When Congress has wished to give plaintiffs an absolute choice of forum, it has shown itself capable of doing so in unmistakable terms." Id. at 696-97 (collecting antiremoval statutes, such as § 22(a), subject to § 1441(a)'s except clause).

Those conclusions also bear on the present issue. First, if § 1441(a)'s except clause is to be taken seriously, then it should not be read into every [*25]  removal statute. But that is just what plaintiff would have the court do. Though § 1453 is entirely silent about § 22(a)—or any other antiremoval provision—plaintiff argues that the court must ensure removal under § 1453 does not violate § 22(a). Far from taking § 1441(a)'s "express exception requirement seriously," that reading renders the except clause entirely superfluous. That is because if antiremoval provisions automatically applied to all removal statutes, regardless of the text of those statutes, § 1441(a) would operate the same way with or without the except clause. See Duncan v. Walker, 533 U.S. 167, 174, 121 S. Ct. 2120, 150 L. Ed. 2d 251 (2001) ("It is our duty to give effect, if possible, to every clause and word of a statute" and noting rule of statutory interpretation against treating "statutory terms as surplusage"). Second, given that Congress provides plaintiff an absolute choice of forum via the combination of § 1441(a)'s broad except clause and antiremoval statutes, it makes little sense to render the former unnecessary. See also WorldCom, 368 F.3d at 106 ("[T]here is no benefit whatever to interpreting the introductory clause of Section 1441(a) as suprlusage . . . In these circumstances, [the court] should avoid an interpretation of Section 1452(a) that renders a key clause of Section 1441(a) unnecessary."). "By contrast, if [the court] give[s] effect to every [*26]  clause in Section 1441(a), the statutory conflict between [§ 1453(b)] and Section 22(a) dissolves." Id. (originally discussing § 1452(a) and § 22(a)).

Lastly, § 1453(b) itself becomes largely superfluous if it is read to include § 1441(a)'s exception. Section 1332(d)(2), states "district courts have original jurisdiction of any civil action" satisfying the CAFA requirements. 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(2) (emphasis added). Accordingly, an action satisfying CAFA's diversity requirements could be removed pursuant to § 1441(a)—allowing for removal of "any civil action . . . of which the district courts of the United States have original jurisdiction." Doing so, however, would subject the removal to § 1441(a)'s except clause and the entire array of federal antiremoval statutes. Plaintiff contends that § 1453(b) should operate the same way and defer to § 22(a)'s removal bar. That makes no sense. If Congress wanted that result, it could have omitted § 1453(b) entirely. Instead, Congress enacted an entirely different removal provision that does not include anything resembling § 1441(a)'s broad except clause.



5. Section 1441(c) Compared to § 1453
Both parties argue that this court's decision should be informed by how courts treated § 1441(c) vis-à-vis § 1441(a) before the former's amendment in 1990.7Link to the text of the note

Defendants argue that similar to how § 1453(b) should operate, courts concluded that cases otherwise [*27]  barred from removal by § 1441(a)'s except clause could nevertheless be removed under pre-1990 § 1441(c). This court agrees. Pre-1990 courts reasoned that subsections (a) and pre-amendment subsection (c) "refer to two completely different situations" with the latter "grant[ing] additional removal jurisdiction in a class of cases which would not otherwise be removable" under the former. Gregg, 348 F. Supp. at 1015 (§ 22(a) did not bar removal under subsection (c)); Emrich, 846 F.2d at 1197. As discussed at length above, the same reasoning applies to § 1453 because, like pre-1990 subsection (c), § 1453 provides a separate basis for removal and does not include anything resembling § 1441(a)'s except clause.

Despite that parallel, plaintiff argues that in fact pre-1990 subsection (c) shows that when Congress resolves conflicts between diversity jurisdiction and antiremoval statutes it does so explicitly. That argument, however, begs the question because it assumes antiremoval statutes automatically apply to all removal provisions—an assumption that the above discussion shows lacks merit. And plaintiff has provided no reason to suspect that § 22(a) operates differently than other run-of-the-mill antiremoval provisions.8Link to the text of the note At most, plaintiff's argument shows that Congress knows how to create removal provisions that are not subject to § 1441(a)'s except clause—by enacting an [*28]  independent removal provision, such as § 1453(b).9Link to the text of the note



CONCLUSION
In sum:

[W]hen an anti-removal provision such as Section 22(a) is invoked, the threshold question is whether removal is being effectuated by way of the general removal statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1441(a), or by way of a separate removal provision that "grants additional removal jurisdiction in a class of cases which would not otherwise be removable under the prior grant of authority." If removal is being effectuated through a provision[, like § 1453,] that confers additional removal jurisdiction, and that provision contains no exception for nonremovable federal claims, the provision should be given full effect.

WorldCom, 368 F.3d at 107 (holding that § 22(a) does not bar removal under § 1452).
Section 1453 grants defendant an additional, independent basis for removing an action from state to federal court. The parties do not dispute and the court finds that plaintiff's California claims satisfy CAFA's removal requirements. Because § 1453 says nothing about incorporating § 1441(a)'s except clause, or otherwise deferring to antiremoval provisions, § 22(a) does not bar removal of this action. In addition, plaintiff's application of § 22(a) to all removal provisions unnecessarily renders numerous statutory clauses superfluous. Lastly, removal [*29]  in this situation accords with Congress' "'overall intent . . . to strongly favor the exercise of federal diversity jurisdiction over class actions with interstate ramifications.'" Jordan, 781 F.3d at 1183-84 ((ellipses in original) discussing Dart Cherokee; quoting congressional record).

Based on the foregoing, plaintiff's motion to remand is DENIED.10Link to the text of the note

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: August 10, 2018

/s/ Phyllis J. Hamilton

PHYLLIS J. HAMILTON

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The court also finds the plaintiff's state law claims meet CAFA's requirements. Plaintiff seeks over $342.8 million in damages on behalf of a worldwide class consisting of "thousands" of members. Compl. ¶¶ 26, 122, 124; Compl. at 29.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff also points to Baker v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, 17-cv-06850-RS, ECF No. 34 (N.D. Cal. April 19, 2018), where the court remanded an action involving both state law and Securities Act claims. That decision does not help plaintiff or assist the court because the Baker defendant removed the action pursuant to § 1441(a), rather than § 1453. As discussed below, two removal statutes treat antiremoval provisions differently.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Section 1441(d) states: "Any civil action brought in a State court against a foreign state as defined in section 1603(a) of this title may be removed by the foreign state to the district court of the United States for the district and division embracing the place where such action is pending. . . ."

4Link to the location of the note in the document
In fact, contrary to federal question removal under §§ 1331 & 1441(a), § 16(c) specifically contemplates the removal of state law claims.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Though not relevant here, CAFA's definitional provision, § 1332(d), also directs or allows courts to decline jurisdiction when certain conditions are present.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Though neither party engages on the topic, "district courts [ ] have original jurisdiction of any civil action" qualifying under CAFA. 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(2) (emphasis added). Thus, if one part of the action qualifies under CAFA, the entire action may be removed. See Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Allapattah Servs., 545 U.S. 546, 559, 125 S. Ct. 2611, 162 L. Ed. 2d 502 (2005) (In general for diversity jurisdiction, "[i]f the court has original jurisdiction over a single claim in the complaint, it has original jurisdiction over a 'civil action . . . '"); Watson v. City of Allen, Tx., 821 F.3d 634, 638 (5th Cir. 2016) ("If CAFA applies, the district court has original jurisdiction over the entire action and there is no 'supplemental' jurisdiction at all.").

7Link to the location of the note in the document
At the time subsection (c) provided that "an entire case 'may' be removed . . . '[w]henever a separate and independent claim or cause of action, which would be removable if sued upon alone, is joined with one or more otherwise nonremovable claims or causes of action.'" Emrich, 846 F.2d at 1197 (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1441(c) (1982)).

8Link to the location of the note in the document
See also Passarella v. Ginn Co., 637 F. Supp. 2d 352, 355 (D.S.C. 2009) (antiremoval provision sharing its language with § 22(a) did not prohibit removal under § 1453).

9Link to the location of the note in the document
The court also notes that reading § 1441(a)'s except clause into the current version of § 1441(c)—a natural extension of plaintiff's overarching argument—renders subsection (c) nonsensical. Under that reading, subsection (c) would provide for the removal of an action with nonremovable claims—e.g., a Securities Act claim—while simultaneously prohibiting removal of that same action.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
Because the court denies plaintiff's motion to remand, the court also denies plaintiff's request for attorneys' fees.

 BACKGROUND
In May 2017, the Court issued a stipulated judgment for $22,500, plus attorney's fees and costs, in Plaintiff Ryan Currier's favor against Defendant Jamie Belstadt (Doc. # 181). After Plaintiff was unable to collect, the Court ordered (on two different occasions) Defendant to provide certain asset-related discovery and to appear for a debtor-creditor examination (Doc. # 222, 241). Defendant eventually did so in December 2017. This should have been the end of the matter.

Unfortunately, that has not been the case. According to Plaintiff, he has been unable to collect on the judgment. So, he has asked the [*3]  Court to intervene, flooding the Court with numerous motions relating to the unpaid judgment. On August 23, 2018, the Court held a hearing on two of these motions.

The first of these pertains to one of garnishees in this case, Coinebase, Inc., with which Defendant has an account. This account consists of cryptocurrency—150 Ethereum and 1.2 Bitcoin—along with $19.71. Plaintiff estimates that the cryptocurrencies are worth $116,995.50 and $11,077.84 respectively. He asks the Court to direct Coinbase to liquidate Defendant's accounts and distribute the proceeds to Plaintiff (Doc. # 322). Defendant, acting pro se, has responded and objects to the garnishment (Doc. # 329).

In a second motion, Plaintiff requests a writ of execution against various personal property (including stocks and investments) and real property owned by Defendant (Doc. # 336). All of this property is located outside the State of Michigan.

These motions are just two of many that fill the Court's docket. In the mere two week span since the Court issued a notice of hearing on the two motions, Plaintiff has filed the following documents: a motion to void fraudulent transfers (Doc. # 339), a supplemental brief to a previous [*4]  motion for order to show cause (Doc. # 342), a supplemental brief to a previous emergency motion for order to show cause (Doc. # 343), a new motion for order to show cause (Doc. # 344), a new motion for attorney fees (Doc. # 345), and a motion for costs (Doc. # 346). The Court will decide all of these motions on the briefs, as oral argument is unnecessary to decide the issues presented. LR 7.1(f)(2).



ANALYSIS
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 69 allows a party "to obtain enforcement remedies against an opposing party." Lewis v. United Joint Venture, 691 F.3d 835, 839 (6th Cir. 2012). Under this rule, the Court must "accord with the procedure of the state where the court is located" unless a federal statute provides otherwise. Fed. R. Civ. P. 69(a)(1). So, the enforcement remedies Plaintiff requests must accord with Michigan law. Here, two of those requests merit specific discussion: the motions for disbursement of funds and the motion for a writ of execution.



I. Motion for Disbursement of Funds
Plaintiff's motion for disbursement of funds pertains to the garnishment of Defendant's personal property possessed by Coinbase Inc. See M.C.R. 3.101. As a garnishee, Coinbase is generally liable for all tangible and intangible property belonging to a defendant in its possession when the writ is served. M.C.R. 3.101(G)(1)(a). Here, Plaintiff seeks the liquidation [*5]  and disbursement of those assets. See M.C.R. 3.101(J)(7) (requiring a plaintiff to "seek an appropriate order regarding application of the property to satisfaction of the judgment" when the garnishee holds property other than money). But under Michigan law, the Court's ability to order satisfaction of a judgment with a defendant's personal property that is in possession of a third party is limited. The Court may only do so if: (1) "the third person is subject to the judicial jurisdiction of the state" and (2) "the personal property to be applied is within the boundaries of this state." M.C.L. § 600.4011(1)(a). It is this latter requirement that proves problematic for Plaintiff.

Plaintiff seeks the liquidation of intangible personal property—Defendant's cryptocurrency accounts with Coinbase. See In re Rapoport's Estate, 317 Mich. 291, 26 N.W.2d 777, 781 (Mich. 1947) (observing that bank accounts and stock certificates are intangible personal property); Macatawa Bank v. Wipperfurth, 294 Mich. App. 617, 822 N.W.2d 237, 238 (Mich. Ct. App. 2011) ("[A]n IRA is intangible personal property, similar to a bank account."). In Michigan, "the situs of intangible assets is the domicile of the owner unless fixed by some positive law." Rapoport's Estate, 26 N.W.2d at 781. It is undisputed that Defendant's domicile is in New York. Thus, his intangible assets, including those possessed by Coinbase, are located there—and thus, not "within [*6]  the boundaries" of Michigan. Wipperfurth, 822 N.W.2d at 238. Plaintiff has cited no "positive law" stating otherwise. Id. Thus, even if the Court has jurisdiction over Coinbase, Defendant's account with the company is not "within the scope of personal property that may be garnished by a Michigan court." Id. (holding that the Florida defendants' IRAs could not be garnished); see also CFE Racing Prods., Inc. v. BMF Wheels, Inc., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72495, 2016 WL 3125211 (E.D. Mich. 2016) (holding that the California defendants' bank accounts could not be garnished). The proper procedure is for Plaintiff to register the judgment in a New York federal court under 28 U.S.C. § 1963 and pursue his collection remedies there. Thus, the Court will deny Plaintiff's motion for disbursement of funds and order that the writ of garnishment directed at Coinbase be quashed.



II. Motion for a Writ of Execution
Plaintiff also seeks a writ of execution against Defendant's real and personal property. "A money judgment is enforced by a writ of execution, unless the court directs otherwise." Fed. R. Civ. P. 69(a)(1). In Michigan, as a judgment creditor, Plaintiff has several options. He may execute against all of Defendant's personal property that is liable to execution at common law. M.C.L. § 600.6017. He may also execute against Defendant's real estate, M.C.L. § 600.6018, but only if execution has first been [*7]  made against Defendant's personal property and only if that property was insufficient to satisfy the judgment. M.C.L. § 600.6004; George v. Sandor M. Gelman, P.C., 201 Mich. App. 474, 506 N.W.2d 583, 585 (Mich. Ct. App. 1993) ("In Michigan, direct attachment of a debtor's real estate is disfavored.").

To this end, Plaintiff has presented the Court with a laundry list of real and personal property that he wishes the Court to issue a writ of execution against. But none of this property is located within the State of Michigan. And aside from a stock recitation of boilerplate post-judgment collection law, Plaintiff has not presented the Court with any authority addressing its power to issue a writ of execution against property located outside of this jurisdiction that is owned by a party domiciled outside of this jurisdiction. Indeed, it is hard to imagine the logistics of Plaintiff's request. Would Plaintiff ask the Wayne County Sheriff to travel to New York to execute the writ? Or the United States Marshal? Plaintiff does not provide an answer. Once again, the better way forward is for Plaintiff to register the judgment in New York and pursue collection remedies there. So, the Court shall deny the motion for writ of execution.



III. Remaining Motions
Finally, the Court will address the other filings [*8]  that have deluged the docket. Plaintiff's attorneys continue to expend an exorbitant amount of time and energy on this case. Yet for all the effort expended, they still have not registered the judgment in New York, even though Defendant is domiciled there and most of the property Plaintiff targets is located there. Plaintiff's counsel's explanation for this idleness was that she needed the Court to first grant Plaintiff's motion for an amended judgment. But in the nine months since that motion was filed, Plaintiff's counsel never saw fit to renew the motion, despite bombarding the Court with many other motions. Doing so may have saved a lot of time and effort, for the parties and the Court.

In any event, the Court has since entered an amended order of judgment reflecting the total award in this case (Doc. # 348). This should allow Plaintiff to pursue collection remedies against Defendant at the situs of his assets. As a result, the Court finds it unnecessary at this time to grant Plaintiff the relief requested in his other pending motions. The Court will also preclude the parties from filing any additional motions without leave of Court to do so.



CONCLUSION
For the reasons above, IT IS [*9]  ORDERED that the motions for disbursement of funds (Doc. # 322), for a writ of execution (Doc. # 336), to void fraudulent transfers (Doc. # 339), for order to show cause (Doc. # 344), for attorney fees (Doc. # 345), and for costs (Doc. # 346) are DENIED. The Court shall also QUASH the writ of garnishment to Coinbase, Inc.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the parties shall not file any additional motions without leave of Court to do so. If a party believes it is necessary to file an additional motion, that party must file a letter addressed to the Court, of no more than one page, outlining the dispute and the attempts to resolve it. The opposing party may file a response to the letter, of no more than one page. I. INTRODUCTION
This securities class action is brought on behalf of individuals who contributed to the Tezos Initial Coin Offering ("ICO") in July 2017. Four related cases have been filed in (or removed to) this Court asserting a variety of federal and state law claims.1Link to the text of the note At core, all of the cases revolve around the underlying assertion that the Tezos ICO involved the sale of unregistered securities. Five different plaintiffs and plaintiff groups initially moved for appointment as lead plaintiff and for approval of their respective selections of counsel. One plaintiff has since conceded, leaving four remaining contenders.2Link to the text of the note In conjunction with their motions for appointment, plaintiffs have also proposed varying approaches to consolidating [*7]  and/or coordinating the four actions at issue.

For the reasons explained below, Arman Anvari is appointed as lead plaintiff. LTL Attorneys LLP and Hung G. Ta, Esq. PLLC will serve as lead counsel. The GGCC, Okusko, and MacDonald actions are consolidated and the Baker action shall be coordinated for case management purposes. Whether Baker should be consolidated can be revisited, if necessary, after the Supreme Court issues its decision in Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, et al., No. 15-1439, and a determination can be made as to whether remand is appropriate.



II. LEGAL STANDARD
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a), a court may consolidate actions that "involve a common question of law or fact." Whether or not to consolidate is at the discretion of the district court. Investors Research Co. v. United States Dist. Court for Cent. Dist., 877 F.2d 777, 777 (9th Cir. 1989). The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act ("PSLRA") requires that when "more than one action on behalf of a class asserting substantially the same claim or claims arising under this title has been filed, and any party has sought to consolidate those actions" the court shall not make a determination [*8]  of lead plaintiff until after a decision on the motion to consolidate is rendered. 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(a)(3)(B)(ii).

The PSLRA requires the court to appoint as lead plaintiff "the member or members of the purported plaintiff class that the court determines to be the most capable of adequately representing the interests of the class members." 15 U.S.C. §78u-4(a)(3)(B)(i); Hodges v. Akeena Solar, Inc., 263 F.R.D. 528, 531 (N.D. Cal. 2009). The Act creates a rebuttable presumption that the most adequate plaintiff is the "person or group of persons" that (i) either filed the complaint or made a motion in response to the published notice; (ii) in the determination of the court, has the largest financial interest in the relief sought; and (iii) otherwise satisfies the requirements of Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(a)(3)(B)(iii).



III. DISCUSSION

A. Consolidation
The movants take varying positions on consolidation. All parties agree that Okusko and GGCC should be consolidated. They disagree, however, over what to do with Baker and MacDonald. This disagreement is based on the factors that distinguish these two cases from the other three: MacDonald brings only state law claims and Baker, which was removed from state court, has been stayed pending a Supreme Court decision that will be relevant to determining whether remand is appropriate. See Baker, Case No. 17-cv-6850, [*9]  Dkt. 18.

Anvari and the Tezos Investors Group both assert MacDonald and Baker should be consolidated with the other two actions—a position supported by Defendants Tezos Stiftung, Dynamic Ledgers Solutions, Inc., Kathleen and Arthur Breitman, Draper Associates V Crypto LLC, and Timothy Draper. Trigon Trading and the Gaviria Group, by contrast, argue MacDonald should be coordinated but not consolidated—i.e., MacDonald and his counsel should coordinate with the other cases when possible regarding scheduling, briefing, and discovery, but the case should not be litigated with the others under a single operative complaint. Finally, Baker argues his case should not be consolidated. Doing so, he contends, would require lifting the stay recently issued in his case, despite not yet having received the Supreme Court guidance that was the reason for the stay, and would thus unjustly force Baker to proceed in federal court.

With regard to MacDonald, the arguments in favor of consolidation are far more persuasive than those against. As an initial matter, the fact that MacDonald advances state rather than federal claims does not preclude consolidation. See, e.g., Ameriprise Fin. Servs. v. Reserve Fund (In re Reserve Fund Sec. & Derivative Litig.), 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 133784, 2009 WL 10467937, at *1-2 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 26, 2009) (consolidating PSLRA and non-PSLRA [*10]  cases involving "the same core set of operative facts"). As previously noted, the standard for consolidation under Rule 42 is whether the actions at issue involve common questions of "law or fact." In applying this standard, courts have found that "[c]onsolidation of private securities fraud class actions arising from the same alleged misconduct is generally appropriate." Knox v. Yingli Green Energy Holding Co. Ltd., 136 F. Supp. 3d 1159, 1162 (C.D. Cal. 2015).

Here, the claims in MacDonald arise from the same factual predicate as the other cases: the Tezos ICO. They rely on the same legal theory: that the ICO constituted an unregistered sale of securities. They seek the same relief: the return of the funds raised. Lastly, they are brought on behalf of a putative class of California contributors to the ICO that is entirely subsumed by the classes in the other three actions. Under these circumstances, the gains in efficiency, convenience, and cost reduction that flow from consolidation are apparent and outweigh any prejudice that might be caused.3Link to the text of the noteSee Sw. Marine, Inc. v. Triple A Mach. Shop, Inc., 720 F.Supp. 805, 807 (N.D. Cal. 1989) ("To determine whether to consolidate, a court weighs the interest of judicial convenience against the potential for delay, confusion and prejudice caused by consolidation.")

Baker's arguments against consolidation are more compelling [*11]  than MacDonald's. Like MacDonald, Baker arises from the same factual predicate, advances similar legal theories, and seeks similar relief. It is quite possible that at some point in the future these factors will make Baker ripe for consolidation. For now, however, Baker is correct that consolidating his action would run counter to the very reason for which the action was stayed. Having refrained from issuing a decision on Baker's remand motion until guidance is provided by the Supreme Court, it would not make sense to force Baker to proceed in federal court before that guidance is forthcoming. Moreover, given that Baker is stayed, there is little prejudice that can flow from failing to consolidate the case at this juncture. In light of the above, GGCC, Okusko, and MacDonald are consolidated. Baker shall be coordinated with the consolidated action—i.e., Baker and his counsel shall be kept informed of all case management and scheduling matters so later consolidation, should that prove appropriate, can be as streamlined as possible.4Link to the text of the note



B. Lead Plaintiff
The Ninth Circuit has articulated a three-part test for determining which applicant meets [*12]  the criteria for lead plaintiff under the PSLRA. In re Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d 726, 732 (9th Cir. 2002). First, the court must determine whether the first plaintiff to file an action issued a notice publicizing the pendency of the action. Id. at 729 (citing 15 U.S.C. §78u-4(a)(3)(A)). Second, the court must decide which plaintiff has the most to gain financially from the lawsuit, and whether this plaintiff satisfies the requirements of Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Id. at 730. Rule 23 provides that a party may serve as a class representative if the claims or defenses of the representative parties are typical of claims or defenses of the class and the representative parties fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class. Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 23(a). Finally, the court must consider competing plaintiffs' attempts to rebut the presumptive plaintiff's showing that it satisfies Rule 23. Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d at 730.

As long as the plaintiff with the largest losses satisfies the typicality and adequacy requirements, he or she is entitled to lead plaintiff status. Id. at 732. The district court may not overcome this statutory presumption, even if it thinks a different plaintiff would do a better job. Id. Nor may the district court consider the relative merits of the plaintiffs seeking lead status. Id. Rather, the process is sequential, starting with the potential plaintiff with the [*13]  greatest financial interest. Id.



1. Notice Requirement and Filings
Here, as required by statute, the plaintiff in GGCC published a notice on November 26, 2017, via PRNewswire, which announced the litigation and correctly stated that motions for lead plaintiff had to be filed within 60 days (i.e., by January 25, 2018). See Dkt. No. 12; 15 U.S.C. §78u-4(a)(3)(A)(I). Four plaintiffs filed motions clearly falling within the statutory deadline:

1. Trigon Trading asserts a financial interest of 18.9999 Bitcoin ("BTC") and seeks approval of Block & Leviton as lead counsel (Dkt. No. 55);

2. David Lang, Ryan Coffey, and Alejandro Gaviria (the "Gaviria Group") assert a financial interest of 9.6163174 BTC and 53.0799 Ethereum ("ETH") and seek approval of the Robbins Geller and Silver Miller firms as lead counsel (Dkt. No. 38);

3. Nicolas Andreasson, Paul Martin, and Richard Reckenbeil (the "Tezos Investors Group") assert a financial interest of 4 BTC and 64.97925707 ETH and seek approval of Levi & Korsinsky as lead counsel (Dkt. 49); and

4. GGCC, LLC, Pumaro, LLC, and Nick Anthony (the "GGCC Group") assert a financial interest of 1.90406 BTC and 11 ETH and seek approval of the Restis and Lite DePalma firms as lead counsel (Dkt. [*14]  No. 53).5Link to the text of the note

A fifth plaintiff, Arman Anvari, also filed a motion on January 25, 2018. Unlike the other plaintiffs, however, Anvari filed his motion in the related MacDonald action rather than this action (GGCC). One day later, on January 26, 2018, he refiled an identical version of his motion in GGCC, asserting a financial interest of 250 ETH and seeking approval of LTL Attorneys LLP and Hung G. Ta, Esq. PLLC ("HGT Law") as lead counsel.

The timing of Anvari's motion is critical because he undisputedly asserts the largest financial interest (see section below). Thus, if his motion is timely, and he satisfies the Rule 23 requirements, he is the presumptive lead plaintiff. Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d at 730.

Not surprisingly, the other movants argue Anvari's motion came too late and therefore should not be considered. They point to various cases in which courts have rigidly enforced the 60-day filing deadline and have emphasized the importance of the strict time requirements imposed by the PSLRA. See, e.g., Zhu v. UCBH Holdings, Inc., 682 F.Supp. 2d 1049, 1053 (N.D. Cal. 2010) ("The plain language of the statutes precludes consideration of a financial loss asserted for the first time in a complaint, or any other pleading, for that matter, filed after the sixty (60) day window has closed.") (citations [*15]  omitted). They even identify one case, Skwortz v. Crayfish Co., 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15532, 2001 WL 1160745 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 28, 2001), in which the court rejected a lead plaintiff application that was filed one day late. 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15532, [WL] at *5.

None of the cases, however, are satisfactorily analogous to the situation presented here.6Link to the text of the note While Anvari's motion in GGCC is one day late, he did file an identical motion in the related MacDonald action by the January 25, 2018 deadline. Moreover, Anvari claims he filed his motion in MacDonald in response to a notice issued by MacDonald's counsel, Hagens Berman. That notice announced a securities class action had been brought on behalf of investors in the Tezos ICO alleging "unregistered offering and sale of securities in violation of Sections 5, 12(a)(1) and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933." It stated the Lead Plaintiff deadline was January 25, 2018. The notice also included a link to a webpage with information regarding MacDonald—including the MacDonald case number (3:17-cv-07095-JSC) and a second reference to the January 25 "Lead Plaintiff Deadline"—but with no mention of GGCC or any of the other related cases.

Under the circumstances, Anvari's filing in MacDonald appears best understood as a mistake made in good faith rather than as an act of legal gamesmanship [*16]  of the sort the PSLRA was designed to prevent. See Reitan, 68 F. Supp. 3d at 399 ("The goal of the PSLRA was not to select individuals for lead plaintiff who make no mistakes—rather it was to promote a client-driven rather than lawyer-driven process . . . ."). Ideally, Anvari's lawyers would have avoided this mistake. There is no indication, however, that the less than twenty-four hours that elapsed between their filing in MacDonald and their subsequent filing of the same motion in GGCC caused any prejudice to the other movants—at oral argument, the other movants acknowledged as much. There is similarly little reason to believe that considering Anvari's motion would foil the overall goals of the PSLRA's time provisions "to ensure that the lead plaintiff is appointed at the earliest possible time and to expedite the lead plaintiff process." See Zhu, 682 F.Supp. 2d at 1053. Rather, refusing to consider Anvari's motion would be an unnecessarily stringent application of the statutory deadlines that would undercut the PSLRA's preference for appointing the plaintiff with the greatest financial stake in the outcome. Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d at 729-30.



2. Financial Interest of Potential Plaintiffs
The Ninth Circuit has not provided clear guidance on which metrics district courts [*17]  should employ in identifying the lead plaintiff which has the largest financial interest, noting only that "the court may select accounting methods that are both rational and consistently applied." See Mulligan v. Impax Labs Inc., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 93119, 2013 WL 3354420, at *4 (N.D. Cal. July 2, 2013) (quoting Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d at 730). Here, given the volatility of cryptocurrency assets, the most rational and consistent way to estimate the financial interest of the potential plaintiffs is by assessing the value of their contributions at the time the Tezos ICO concluded. Using this benchmark, the financial interest of each of the movants is as listed below:

Movant	ETH/BTC	Approximate USD
 	Contributed	Value At Close of ICO7Link to the text of the note
Arman Anvari	250 ETH	$49,467.50
Trigon Trading	18.9999 BTC	$44,235.76
Gaviria Group	9.62 BTC; 53.1 ETH	$32,904.28
Tezos Investors Group	4 BTC; 65 ETH	$22,174.39
GGCC Group	1.9 BTC; 11 ETHC	$6,600.17
As evidenced by this chart, Anvari has the largest financial interest in the litigation, a fact that no movant has disputed.



3. Rule 23(a) Requirements - Typicality and Adequacy
Because Anvari has the largest financial interest, the next step is to determine whether he meets the "typicality" and "adequacy" requirements of Rule 23(a). Cavanaugh, 306 F.3d at 730. In making this determination, two questions are considered: "(1) do[es] the named plaintiff[] and [his] [*18]  counsel have any conflicts of interest with the other class members and (2) will the named plaintiff[] and [his] counsel prosecute the action vigorously on behalf of the class?" Hanlon v. Chrysler Corp., 150 F.3d 1011, 1020 (9th Cir. 1998).

Here, there is no serious dispute as to Anvari's typicality. As an individual who contributed to the Tezos ICO, his claims are representative of the putative class.8Link to the text of the note The other movants do challenge Anvari's adequacy, however, on the grounds that: 1) he filed an improper certification; 2) he previously worked at a law firm, Perkins Coie LLP, which has counselled other cryptocurrency startups; and 3) he has selected counsel that is not sufficiently qualified.

The first two of these arguments are especially unpersuasive. With regard to certification, Civil Local Rule 3-7(c) explicitly states that "[a]ny party seeking to serve as lead plaintiff, but who does not file a complaint, need not file the certification required in Civil L.R. 3-7(b)." (emphasis added). Accordingly, Anvari was not required to file the certification in question and any deficiencies in that certification that have not already been corrected by his subsequent filings are not a "determinative factor" in selecting the lead plaintiff. Pirelli Armstrong Tire Corp. Retiree med. [*19]  Benefits Trust v. Labranche & Co., Inc., 229 F.R.D. 395, 407 (S.D.N.Y. 2004). With regard to his past employment, Anvari has stated that he never worked on cryptocurrency assignments while at Perkins Coie. Even if he had, it is unclear why he would have any continuing allegiance to the interests or views of his former employer in a way that would put him in conflict with other class members.

The third argument merits slightly more consideration. The other movants contend that Anvari has selected counsel that is not equal to the task of litigating this securities class action. First, they argue the resumes for both LTL Attorneys and HGT Law reveal a lack of experience in litigation of this sort. Second, they assert Anvari's counsel has already made mistakes demonstrating their inadequacy including: filing Anvari's motion late (and/or in the wrong case), filing an allegedly deficient certification, and inaccurately referencing the wrong securities laws. It is true that LTL and HGT appear to have somewhat less experience in litigating complex securities class actions than do some of the law firms selected by other movants. They are not, however, as inexperienced as the other movants suggest, nor is the Court tasked with assessing the adequacy of a putative lead [*20]  plaintiff's choice of counsel with the rigor that the other movants seek. As the Ninth Circuit explained in Cavanaugh,

The presumptive lead plaintiff's choice of counsel and fee arrangements may be relevant in ensuring that the plaintiff is not receiving preferential treatment through some back-door financial arrangement with counsel, or proposing to employ a lawyer with a conflict of interest. But this is not a beauty contest; the district court has no authority to select for the class what it considers to be the best possible lawyer or the lawyer offering the best possible fee schedule. Indeed, the district court does not select class counsel at all. Rather, such information is relevant only to determine whether the presumptive lead plaintiff's choice of counsel is so irrational, or so tainted by self-dealing or conflict of interest, as to cast genuine and serious doubt on that plaintiff's willingness or ability to perform the functions of lead plaintiff.

306 F.3d at 732-33.
As evidenced by its submitted materials, LTL is a litigation firm with three offices and over 30 attorneys. Its lawyers have substantial experience litigating complex class actions in state and federal court and appear to have obtained [*21]  favorable results for class members in multiple cases. HGT's filings, as well as Mr. Ta's presentation at oral argument, similarly make clear that its attorneys, though less numerous, have reputable credentials and significant litigation experience. Accordingly, Anvari's selection of LTL and HGT as lead counsel comes nowhere near to being "so irrational" as to "cast genuine doubt" on Anvari's adequacy.

Given that Anvari has the most significant financial interest in this action and also satisfies the typicality and adequacy requirements of Rule 23, he is the presumptive lead plaintiff. The other movants have failed to offer evidence sufficient to overcome that presumption. Therefore, Anvari shall be appointed lead plaintiff in this action.



4. Selection of Lead Counsel
Once a lead plaintiff is chosen, that plaintiff may select its counsel, subject to approval of the court. 15 U.S.C. §78u-4(a)(3)(B)(iv). As discussed above, Anvari's choice of counsel is acceptable. LTL Attorneys LLP and HGT Law are therefore appointed as co-lead counsel.



V. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court orders as follows:

1. Actions17-cv-6829 (Okusko), 17-cv-7095 (MacDonald), and 17-cv-6779 (GGCC) are hereby consolidated pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a) for pretrial [*22]  purposes. The consolidated action shall be captioned: "In re Tezos Securities Litigation," and shall be maintained in one file under Master File No. 17-cv-06779-RS.

2. All related actions subsequently filed in, or transferred to, this District shall be consolidated with this action for pretrial purposes. The parties shall notify the Court of any other action pending or filed outside of this District which may be related to the subject matter of the consolidated action when they become aware of such actions.

3. Every pleading filing in the consolidated action shall bear the following caption:



UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
IN RE TEZOS SECURITIES LITIGATION

This document relates to:

Master File No. 17-cv-06779-RS



CLASS ACTION
4. When a pleading is intended to be applicable to all actions to which this Order applies, the words "All Actions" shall appear immediately after the words "This document relates to:" in the caption above. When a pleading applies only to some of the actions, the document shall list, immediately after the phrase "This document relates to:" the docket number for each individual action to which the document applies, along with the last name of [*23]  the first-listed plaintiff in said action.

5. Arman Anvari is appointed as lead plaintiff. LTL Attorneys LLP and Hung G. Ta, Esq. PLLC will serve as lead counsel.

6. Within ten (10) days of the entry of this Order, the parties shall meet and confer and file with the Court a stipulation and proposed order setting forth a proposed schedule for the filing of a consolidated complaint and a briefing schedule for defendants' anticipated motions in response to the consolidated complaint.

7. Anvari and his selected counsel shall coordinate with Baker and his counsel regarding case management matters so that later consolidation of the Baker action, Case No. 17-cv-6850, if necessary, can be completed as efficiently as possible.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: 3/16/18

/s/ Richard Seeborg

RICHARD SEEBORG

United States District Judge

Footnotes
The three actions other than this one are: Okusko v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al, Case No. 17-cv-6829; Baker v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc. et al, Case No. 17-cv-6850; and MacDonald v. Dynamic Ledger Solutions, Inc., et al., Case No. 17-cv-7095.

The four remaining contenders for lead plaintiff are: 1) Arman Anvari; 2) Trigon Trading; 3) David Lang, Ryan Coffey, and Alejandro Gaviria (the "Gaviria Group"); and 4) Nicolas Andreasson, Paul Martin, and Richard Reckenbeil (the "Tezos Investors Group").

MacDonald presents no reasons why the state law claims would be prejudiced through consolidation beyond being subject to the temporary discovery stay imposed by the PSLRA. Such a limited stand down period ultimately is unlikely to have a negative impact on the plaintiffs.

Bitcoin Suisse AG and Niklas Nikolajsen, two defendants in the MacDonald action, object to consolidation of MacDonald on the grounds that they believe they were improperly named in the MacDonald action and are not subject to personal jurisdiction. See MacDonald, 17-cv-7095, Dkt. No. 88. Consolidation of MacDonald does not require that Bitcoin Suisse AG or Nikolajsen waive either of these arguments. They may raise their jurisdictional objections in the consolidated action if they so choose. Accordingly, their objection to consolidation is overruled.

The GGCC Group has subsequently withdrawn its application for lead and given its support to the application of Arman Anvari.

Some of the cases cited also acknowledge that while courts generally enforce the sixty-day deadline, "rare circumstances" may justify consideration of an untimely motion. See, e.g., In re MicroStrategy Inc. Sec. Litig., 110 F.Supp. 2d 427, 433 (E.D. Va. 2000). See also Reitan v. China Mobile Games & Entm't Grp, Ltd., 68 F. Supp. 3d 390, 397 (S.D. N.Y. 2014) (collecting cases and noting common reasons why certain courts "have not adhered strictly to the PSLRA's timing requirements in every instance," including where "granting the motion would not undermine any of the policies that underlie the PSLRA").

The USD value of BTC and ETH are based on the closing prices for each currency for July 14, 2017 (the final day of the Tezos ICO) as found on http://www.coindesk.com . For BTC, that price is $2328.21. For ETH, it is $197.87.

At least one movant has suggested that issues may arise from having a lead plaintiff (or plaintiff group) that contributed either BTC or ETH to the Tezos ICO but not both. At oral argument, however, counsel could not identify how the currency used to make the contribution made any discernible difference to the issues to be litigated.

  LexisNexis Logo
RELX Group Logo. I. Background
Plaintiff Brandon Leidel ("Plaintiff" "Leidel"), individually and on [*2]  behalf of all other persons similarly situated, brings this class action complaint against Defendant Coinbase, Inc. ("Defendant" "Coinbase"), a digital currency wallet and online platform where merchants and consumer can buy, sell, transfer and store their digital currency. (Compl. ¶ 10, DE 1.) According to the Complaint, Defendant holds itself out as a regulated and fully compliant entity, registered with the United States Department of Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network ("FinCEN") as a money services business, as that term is defined by FinCEN. (Compl. ¶ 11.) Plaintiffs are a class of similarly situated users of Project Investors, Inc. d/b/a Cryptsy, a cryptocurrency and money service business that served clients in the United States and abroad. (Compl. ¶ 1. ) Cryptsy was owned, operated and directed by Paul Vernon, the company's president and chief executive officer. (Compl. ¶ 24.)

Cryptsy and Vernon each had an account at Coinbase. (Compl. ¶ 45.) Unbeknownst to the class Plaintiffs, Cryptsy and Vernon were stealing from user accounts and liquidating the currency through Crypsty and Vernon's accounts at Coinbase. (Compl. ¶ 50.) The Complaint alleges that Coinbase knew [*3]  or should have known that Plaintiffs' assets were being liquidated through its exchange. (Compl. ¶ 73.) The class Plaintiffs bring claims for aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duty (count one); aiding and abetting conversion (count two); negligence (count three) and unjust enrichment (count four) against Defendant.1Link to the text of the note

Coinbase points to an arbitration clause contained in a 2013 User Agreement and agreed to by Cryptsy and Vernon which states:

Except for claims for injunctive or equitable relief or claims regarding intellectual property rights ... any dispute arising under this Agreement shall be finally settled on an individual basis in accordance with the American Arbitration Association's rules for arbitration of consumer-related disputes and you and Coinbase hereby expressly waive trial by jury. The arbitration shall take place in San Francisco, California, in the English language and the arbitral decision may be enforced in any court.

(Ex. B, DE 16-1.)
Coinbase also relies upon the arbitration clause in the 2014 User Agreement, also agreed to by Crypsty and Vernon:

EXCEPT FOR CLAIMS FOR INJUNCTIVE OR EQUITABLE RELIEF OR CLAIMS REGARDING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS … ANY DISPUTE ARISING [*4]  UNDER THIS AGREEMENT SHALL BE FINALLY SETTLED ON AN INDIVIDUAL BASIS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AMERICAN ARBITRATION ASSOCIATION'S RULES FOR ARBITRATION OF CONSUMER-RELATED DISPUTES AND YOU AND COINBASE HEREBY EXPRESSLY WAIVE TRIAL BY JURY. THE ARBITRATION SHALL TAKE PLACE IN SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND THE ARBITRAL DECISION MAY BE ENFORCED IN ANY COURT. AT YOUR REQUEST, HEARINGS MAY BE CONDUCTED IN PERSON OR BY TELEPHONE AND THE ARBITRATOR MAY PROVIDE FOR SUBMITTING AND DETERMINING MOTIONS ON BRIEFS, WITHOUT ORAL HEARINGS. … ADDITIONALLY, YOU HEREBY WAIVE YOUR RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT OR CLASS-WIDE ARBITRATION.

(Ex. E, DE 16-1.)
Based on these provisions, Defendant moves to compel Plaintiff to arbitrate, as a non-signatory under the doctrine of equitable estoppel. Alternatively, Defendant requests that the Court stays the litigation pending the resolution of the arbitration.



II. Discussion
The Supreme Court has articulated a strong federal policy favoring arbitration agreements. See Moses H. Cone Mem'l Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U.S. 1, 24, 103 S. Ct. 927, 74 L. Ed. 2d 765 (1983). One of the purposes of the Federal Arbitration Act ("FAA"), 9 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., is to "ensure judicial enforcement of privately made agreements to arbitrate." Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc. v. Byrd, 470 U.S. 213, 219, 105 S. Ct. 1238, 84 L. Ed. 2d 158 (1985). As such, arbitration [*5]  agreements must be "rigorously enforce[d]" by the courts. Id. at 221. Because arbitration is a matter of contract, however, the FAA's strong pro-arbitration policy only applies to disputes that the parties have agreed to arbitrate. Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 514 U.S. 52, 57, 115 S. Ct. 1212, 131 L. Ed. 2d 76 (1995). "[A] party plainly cannot be bound by an arbitration clause to which it does not consent." BG Grp., PLC v. Republic of Argentina,     U.S.    , 134 S. Ct. 1198, 1213, 188 L. Ed. 2d 220 (2014) (Sotomayor, J. concurring).

Arbitration may be compelled against non-signatories to an arbitration agreement if, under state law contract principles, "assent [is] shown by the acts or performance of the party." BDO Seidman, LLP v. Bee, 970 So. 2d 869, 874 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2007). A non-signatory can be estopped "from claiming the benefits of a contract while simultaneously attempting to avoid the burdens that contract imposes." Id. (citing Blinco v. Green Tree Servicing LLC, 400 F.3d 1308, 1312 (11th Cir. 2005)). According to Defendant, Plaintiff's claims are based upon the assertion that when Defendant agreed to open the accounts, Defendant took on a duty to Plaintiff and other Cryptsy account holders to oversee the activities of Cryptsy and Vernon with regard to the accounts. Therefore, according to Defendant, because Plaintiff's claims are based upon the accounts established pursuant to the user agreement, Plaintiff must arbitrate his claims under the principles of equitable estoppel. (Mot. at 12.)

The Court disagrees. [*6]  In Seth v. Rajagopalan, No. 12-Civ-61040, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199810, 2013 WL 11927712 (S.D. Fla. Jan. 25, 2013), the plaintiff sued a corporate defendant and its principal for fraud after he suffered a million dollar loss. Id. at * 1. All of the defendants had entered into a contractual agreement with one another that contained an arbitration agreement. Id. at * 2. The plaintiff was not a party to the agreement. After finding that the cross-claims between the defendants were subject to arbitration, the Court turned to the plaintiff's claims. Id. at * 5. The court rejected the assertion that the plaintiff was equitably estopped from avoiding arbitration where the plaintiff's case did not hinge entirely on the agreement containing the arbitration clause, the plaintiff was not seeking damages in accordance with the agreement containing the arbitration clause and the plaintiff did not directly benefit from the agreement. Id. at * 8.

Here, Plaintiff received no benefits from the agreement entered into between Cryptsy/Vernon and Defendant, and Plaintiff is not asserting any rights or benefits under the th agreement. See In re Humana Inc. Managed Care Litigation, 285 F.3d 971, 976 (11th Cir. 2002), rev'd on other grounds, 538 U.S. 401, 123 S. Ct. 1531, 155 L. Ed. 2d 578 (2003) ("The plaintiff's actual dependance on the underlying contract in making out the claim against the nonsignatory defendant is therefore always the sine [*7]  qua non of an appropriate situation for applying equitable estoppel). This is reflected in the fact that Plaintiff does not bring a claim for breach of contract, but for tort claims.2Link to the text of the note Moreover, Plaintiff's claims are not derivative of the Receiver's claims, as posited by Defendant. To the contrary, based on the allegations, Plaintiff was directly harmed.

Furthermore, the contract entered into between Cryptsy/Vernon and Defendant had nothing to do with the alleged wrongful conduct. Any indirect benefits Plaintiff received did not arise from the contract, but from the regulatory scheme under which Defendant operates. The Florida Supreme Court has remarked: Seifert v. U.S. Home Corp., 750 So. 2d 633, 639 (Fla. 1999) (internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted).

If the contract places the parties in a unique relationship that creates new duties not otherwise imposed by law, then a dispute regarding a breach of a contractually-imposed duty is one that arises from the contract. Analogously, such a claim would be one arising from the contract terms and therefore subject to arbitration where the contract required it. If, on the other hand, the duty alleged to be breached is one imposed by law in recognition of public policy and is generally owed to [*8]  others besides the contracting parties, then a dispute regarding such a breach is not one arising from the contract, but sounds in tort. Therefore, a contractually-imposed arbitration requirement would not apply to such a claim.

As to Defendant's request that the case be stayed pending the arbitration of the Receiver's claims, it is axiomatic that courts have discretion to stay non-arbitrable claims. Klay v. Pacificare Health Sys., Inc., 389 F.3d 1191, 1204 (11th Cir. 2004). Courts, however, "generally refuse to stay proceedings of nonarbitrable claims when it is feasible to proceed with the litigation." Id. (citing Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, 470 U.S. 213, 225, 105 S. Ct. 1238, 84 L. Ed. 2d 158 (1985)).
The Court finds that the "the outcome of the nonarbitrable claims" will not "depend on the arbitrator's decision" and the claims brought by Plaintiff are independent of the claims brought by the Receiver. See Branch v. Ottinger, 477 F. App'x 718, 721 (11th Cir. 2012) (no basis to stay non-arbitrable claims that, while related to the arbitrable claims, were independent and involved different parties).

For the foregoing reasons, the motion to compel arbitration is denied.



III. Conclusion
Accordingly, it is hereby ORDERED AND ADJUDGED as follows:

1) Defendant's Corrected Motion to Compel Arbitration (DE 16) is DENIED.

2) Defendant's Motion to Stay Discovery (DE 32) is DENIED.

DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at [*9]  West Palm Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, this 1st day of June, 2017.

/s/ Kenneth A. Marra

KENNETH A. MARRA

United States District Judge

Footnotes
Plaintiff James D. Sallah is the receiver for Project Investors, Inc. d/b/a Cryptsy. As part of this Complaint, he brought claims against Defendant for aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duty (count five); aiding and abetting conversion (count six); negligence (count seven) and unjust enrichment (count eight). The receiver has consented to arbitrate his claims against Defendant and the parties agreed to dismiss those claims without prejudice. (DE 30.)

The Court recognizes that "[w]hether a claim falls within the scope of an arbitration agreement turns on the factual allegations in the complaint rather than the legal causes of action th asserted." Gregory v. Electro-Mech. Corp., 83 F.3d 382, 384 (11th Cir. 1996). For the reasons stated herein, however, the Court finds that Plaintiff's claims are not within the scope of the arbitration clause.

 I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Defendant Centra Tech is a start-up company that purported to develop and market technology the company claimed would allow individuals around the world to store and spend their cryptocurrency, such as current market leaders Bitcoin and Ether, with the ease of spending traditional fiat currency, such as U.S. dollars. Complaint ("Compl.") at ¶ 2. Defendants Sohrab Sharma, Raymond Trapani, Robert Farkas, and William Hagner are or were founders and/or officers in Centra Tech.1Link to the text of the note Compl. at ¶¶ 12-14.

Centra Tech was incorporated in Delaware on July 27, 2017 and maintains its headquarters at 555 Washington Avenue, Miami Beach, Florida 33139. Compl. at ¶ 11. Centra Tech advertised itself to consumers as "the world's first Debit Card that is designed for use with compatibility on 8+ major cryptocurrencies blockchain assets." Compl. at ¶ 30. As such, Centra Tech proposed to be the first company to provide a bridge [*3]  between the nascent cryptocurrency industry and the general retail world, transforming blockchain currencies, which are currently accepted only in limited settings, into widely usable currency by allowing individuals to pay for goods and services with cryptocurrency through a common debit card. Defendants conducted an "initial coin offering" or "ICO" from July 30, 2017 through October 5, 2017 in order to raise capital for further development of the Centra Debit Card and Centra Wallet. Compl. at ¶ 2. Centra also claimed to be planning development of an online marketplace referred to as cBay. Compl. at ¶ 2.

During its ICO, Centra Tech offered what it referred to as a token, known as the Centra Token or CTR, for sale to the public. Compl. at ¶ 3. Centra Tech represented that a member of the public would need to own CTR to utilize the Centra Wallet or Centra Card, neither of which yet exist. Compl. at ¶¶ 2-3. The Plaintiffs allege that the Centra ICO and sale of tokens was an offer and sale of securities. Compl. at ¶ 3.

Plaintiffs Jacob Zowie Thomas Rensel and Wang Yun He participated in the Centra Tech ICO and allege that they, and other member of the Class, sustained harm as a result of [*4]  the Defendant's conduct in violation of the Securities Act of 1933 (hereafter, "Securities Act").



II. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
The instant Complaint was filed on December 13, 2017, alleging violations of Section 12(a) of the Securities Act, 15 U.S.C. § 77l, against all Defendants and violation of Section 15(a) of the Securities Act, 15 U.S.C. § 77o, against the Individual Defendants, ECF No. [1]. The Defendants filed their Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay and/or in the Alternative to Dismiss Under Rule 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6) on February 2, 2018, ECF No. [26]. Therein, the Defendants argue that (1) the Plaintiff should be compelled to arbitrate his claims pursuant to a mandatory arbitration provision; (2) the Plaintiff lacks Article III standing to bring a claim; and (3) the Plaintiff has failed to plead facts sufficient to support control person allegations against the individual defendants, ECF No. [26] at 6-7. The Plaintiff filed his Response in Opposition on February 16, 2018, ECF No. [31], and the Defendants filed their Reply on February 23, 2018, ECF No. [34]. Because Defendants attached an affidavit to the Reply that attempted to submit new evidence, the Plaintiff was granted leave to file a sur-reply, and did so on April 17, 2018, ECF No. [66].

On March [*5]  5, 2018, Wang Yun He filed a Motion for Appointment as Lead Plaintiff and Approval of Selection of Counsel, ECF No. [39]. Therein, Mr. He argued that he, and not Plaintiff Rensel, was the most adequate plaintiff as defined by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Plaintiff Rensel filed a Motion for Appointment as Lead Counsel that same day, and subsequently moved the court for an order permitting limited discovery as to adequacy and typicality of Mr. He to serve as Lead Plaintiff, ECF No. [44]. On March 16, 2018, Plaintiff Rensel and Mr. He filed a Joint Motion for Appointment as Co-Lead Plaintiffs and Approval of Selection of Counsel, arguing that both proposed plaintiffs met all requirements and that a co-lead structure would benefit the class. The court granted the Joint Motion on April 9, 2018, ECF No. [59].

Separately, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") filed suit in the Southern District of New York against Sohrab Sharma and Robert Farkas on April 2, 2018, alleging the defendants engaged in and are engaging in ongoing securities fraud in violation of Section 17(a)(1)-(3) of the Securities Act of 1933 ("Securities Act") [15 U.S.C. § 77q(a)(1)-(3)], Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 [*6]  (the "Exchange Act") [15 U.S.C. § 78j(b)], and Rule 10b-5(a)-(c) thereunder [17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5(a)-(c)]; and that, without a registration statement being in effect or filed, Defendants engaged and are engaged in the unlawful sale and offer to sell securities in violation of Sections 5(a) and 5(c) of the Securities Act [15 U.S.C. §§ 77e(a), 77e(c)]. SEC v. Sharma et al., Case No. 1:18-cv-02909-DLC (S.D.N.Y. filed April 2, 2018). On April 20, 2018, an Amended Complaint was filed in that action adding Mr. Trapani as a defendant.

Criminal charges have also been filed against Mr. Sharma, Mr. Farkas, and Mr. Trapani in the Southern District of New York in connection with the Centra Tech ICO. USA v. Sharma et al., Case No. 1:18-cr-00340-LGS (S.D.N.Y. filed March 31, 2018). The Government has filed charges against the defendants for (1) Conspiracy to Commit Securities Fraud; (2) Securities Fraud; (3) Conspiracy to Commit Wire Fraud; and (4) Wire Fraud.

On April 5, 2018, the Plaintiff filed its Renewed Motion for Temporary Restraining Order. The Plaintiff has renewed its Motion for Temporary Restraining Order "because newly discovery factual developments concerning the status and safekeeping of the ICO proceeds necessitate immediate judicial intervention." Specifically, the Plaintiff contends [*7]  that information disclosed in relation to the SEC action filed in the Southern District of New York indicates that relevant assets have been depleted and that Defendant Farkas' attempt to flee further shows there is a significant risk of one of Defendants or an affiliate attempting to remove relevant assets beyond the reach of the United States judicial system, ECF No. [54] at 1-2. Accordingly, Plaintiff seeks an order: (i) temporarily restraining Defendants from directly or indirectly, alone or in concert with others (including any officer, agent, employee and/or representative of Centra Tech), transferring or dissipating the ICO proceeds; (ii) imposing an asset freeze and constructive trust covering Defendants Centra Tech, Sharma, Trapani, Farkas and Hagner—along with Centra Tech's current or former officers, agents, affiliates and the Individual Defendants' affiliates, representatives and other relevant individuals' accounts and/or digital currency wallets holding any ICO proceeds; (iii) prohibiting Defendants, their officers, affiliates, and other relevant individuals from destroying, erasing or otherwise making unavailable for further proceedings in this matter, any records or [*8]  documents (including data or information maintained in computer files or other electronic storage media) which relate to Centra Tech or the Centra Tech ICO; (iv) requiring Defendants to provide an interim accounting, under oath, detailing: (a) all investor monies, assets, digital currencies, virtual currencies, cryptocurrencies, collected in connection with the Centra Tech ICO and Centra Tech's business operations; and (b) a schedule of all transactions involving the ICO proceeds, including all transfers, liquidations, purchases and expenditures involving the ICO proceeds from July 1, 2017 through the date of the accounting.2Link to the text of the note

In response, the Defendants consent to the entry of an Order providing limited injunctive relief, but argue that further injunctive relief is unwarranted. Defendants note that on April 13, 2018, the Southern District of New York issued a warrant of seizure for 91,000 Ether stored in the ICO wallet, ECF No. [63] at 3. As of May 16, 2018, that 91,000 Ether has been transferred to a government-controlled digital wallet, ECF No. [72].



III. APPLICABLE LAW
Plaintiffs seek a Temporary Restraining Order pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65(b).3Link to the text of the note The same four factors apply to the determination of whether [*9]  to grant a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction. Schiavo v. Schiavo, 403 F.3d 1223, 1225-26 (11th Cir. 2005). To prevail on a request for either form of relief, a movant must demonstrate the following four elements:

(1) a substantial likelihood of success on the merits of the underlying case,

(2) the movant will suffer irreparable harm in the absence of an injunction,

(3) the harm suffered by the movant in the absence of an injunction would exceed the harm suffered by the opposing party if the injunction issued, and

(4) an injunction would not disserve the public interest.

Johnson & Johnson Vision Care. Inc. v. 1-800 Contacts, Inc., 299 F.3d 1242, 1246-47 (11th Cir. 2002) (citation omitted). A preliminary injunction is an extraordinary and drastic remedy which should not be granted unless the movant can clearly establish each of the four elements. Wreal, LLC v. Amazon.com, Inc., 840 F.3d 1244, 1247 (11th Cir. 2016) (citing Siegel v. LePore, 234 F.3d 1163, 1176 (11th Cir. 2000)). The failure to establish an element will warrant denial of the request for preliminary injunctive relief and obviate the need to consider the remaining prerequisites. Dawson v. Ameritox, Ltd., 571 F. App'x 875, 880 (11th Cir. 2014); see also Pittman v. Cole, 267 F.3d 1269, 1292 (11th Cir. 2001) (citing Church v. City of Huntsville, 30 F.3d 1332, 1342 (11th Cir. 1994)). Indeed, "a preliminary injunction is a powerful exercise of judicial authority in advance of trial. The chief function of a preliminary injunction is to preserve the status quo until the merits of the controversy can be fully and fairly adjudicated." [*10]  Northeastern Fla. Chapter of the Ass'n of Gen. Contractors v. City of Jacksonville, 896 F.2d 1283, 1284 (11th Cir. 1990). Thus, a preliminary injunction "is not the same as an adjudication on the merits," but is merely a device created to preserve the rights of the parties until a determination can be made on the merits. Tipsey McStumbles, LLC, v. Griffin, No. CV 111-053, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 164191, 2011 WL 13217129, *1 n.1 (S.D. Ga. Aug. 2, 2011) (citing Augusta Video, Inc. v. Augusta-Richmond Cnty., Ga., 249 F. App'x 93, 98 n.4 (11th Cir. 2007).
In considering a motion for preliminary injunctive relief, "a district court may rely on affidavits and hearsay materials which would not be admissible evidence for a permanent injunction, if the evidence is 'appropriate given the character and objectives of the injunctive proceeding.'" Levi Strauss & Co. v. Sunrise Int'l Trading Inc., 51 F.3d 982, 985 (11th Cir. 1995) (citing Asseo v. Pan Am. Grain Co., 805 F.2d 23, 26 (1st Cir. 1986)). When considering a motion for preliminary injunction, a district court may assess the relative strength and persuasiveness of the evidence presented by the parties, and is not required to resolve factual disputes in favor of the non-moving party. See Imaging Business Machines, LLC. v. BancTec, Inc., 459 F.3d 1186, 1192 (11th Cir. 2006).



IV. ANALYSIS
The Plaintiff argues that a temporary restraining order is appropriate because (1) Plaintiff is likely to succeed on the merits of his claims; (2) Plaintiff and the class face irreparable harm; (3) the balance of the equities favor the Plaintiff; and (4) the public interest will be served by entry of a temporary restraining order, ECF No. [54]. In their Response, the Defendants [*11]  dispute the Plaintiff's entitlement to the relief sought generally and contend that much of the relief requested has already been rendered moot. The Defendants, however, agree to certain limited relief. In its Response, the Defendants state that "Centra Tech consents to an order enjoining Centra Tech from accessing the assets in the ICO Wallet for any purpose other than complying with the Seizure Warrant (and to a preliminary injunction of the same scope)." ECF No. [63], Response at 4. Centra Tech further "consents to the entry of a preservation order" "to the extent that Centra Tech is currently in possession of or has returned to it any materials relevant to the instant matter." ECF No. [63], Response at 5.4Link to the text of the note At oral argument, the Defendants further consented to entry of an asset freeze as to the contents of the ICO Wallet, including the 8,932.325 Ether that was not subject to the government's Seizure Warrant.

Therefore, the undersigned will consider the Plaintiff's arguments as to its entitlement to a temporary restraining order beyond the scope of that agreed to by the Defendants.



A. Likelihood of Success on the Merits
First, the Plaintiff must establish a likelihood of success on the [*12]  merits. Because Plaintiff's control person liability claims depend upon the viability of the underlying Section 12 claim, it is necessary for the Plaintiff to demonstrate a likelihood of success on the Section 12 claim in order to establish an entitlement to a temporary restraining order. In order to establish liability under Section 12(a)(1), a Plaintiff in the Eleventh Circuit must prove (1) the Defendants sold or offered to sell securities; (2) no registration statement was in effect as to the securities; and (3) interstate transportation or communication and the mails were used in connection with the sale or offer of sale. Sec. & Exch. Comm'n v. Levin, 849 F.3d 995, 1001 (11th Cir. 2017). Plaintiffs must also prove an entitlement to recovery under the statute. In re Mut. Funds Inv. Litig., 384 F. Supp. 2d 845, 866 (D. Md. 2005). "A substantial likelihood of success on the merits requires a showing of only likely or probable, rather than certain, success." Schiavo ex rel. Schindler v. Schiavo, 403 F.3d 1223, 1232 (11th Cir. 2005) (citations omitted).



1. Centra Tokens are Securities
The Defendants have conceded for purposes of the present motion only that the Centra Tokens sold are securities, though they have indicated an intention to challenge that classification if necessary at a later time, ECF No. [26], Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay and/or Dismiss at 7 n.6 ("Centra Tech disputes the characterization of the [*13]  Centra Token as a security and will raise that argument if necessary at the appropriate time.") Nonetheless, in order to determine the Plaintiffs' likelihood of success on the merits, this court must analyze the characterization of Centra Tokens as a security. The Defendants do not dispute that Centra Tokens were sold to the public by the Defendants, so the first element of liability under Section 12(a) is established if it is determined that the Centra Tokens are securities under the Securities Act,. ECF No. [26-1] Shutt Decl. at ¶ 6 ("From July 30, 2017 through September 26, 2017, Centra Tech held an initial coin offering ("ICO") in which it issued to the public a "utility token" of its own creation—the Centra Token ("CTR")).

The definition of security under the Securities Act includes "investment contract(s)." "An offering is an investment contract if there is: (1) an investment of money (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with the expectation of profits to come solely from the efforts of others." Tippens v. Round Island Plantation LLC, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 66224, 2009 WL 2365347, at *9 (S.D. Fla. July 31, 2009) (citing SEC v. Unique Fin. Concepts, Inc., 196 F.3d 1195, 1199 (11th Cir. 1999).

It is well-established that the "investment of money" required for an investment contract need not be made in cash, and refers more generally to "an arrangement whereby an investor commits assets [*14]  to an enterprise or venture in such a manner as to subject himself to financial losses. SEC v. Friendly, 49 F. Supp. 2d 1363, 1368-69 (S.D. Fla. 1999); see also Uselton v. Comm. Lovelace Motor Freight, Inc., 940 F.2d 564, 574 (10th Cir. 1991). Thus, the Plaintiffs' investment of assets, in the form of Ether and/or Bitcoin, satisfies the "investment of money" prong for an investment contract.

Plaintiffs must next establish the existence of a "common enterprise." In the Eleventh Circuit, "a common enterprise exists where the 'fortunes of the investor are interwoven with and dependent upon the efforts and success of those seeking the investment of third parties." SEC v. Unique, 196 F.3d at 1199 (citing Villeneuve v. Advanced Bus. Concepts Corp., 698 F.2d 1121, 1124 (11th Cir. 1990)). "The thrust of the common enterprise test is that the investors have no desire to perform the chores necessary for a return, and are attracted to the investment solely by the prospects of a return. Eberhardt v. Waters, 901 F.2d 1578, 1580-81 (11th Cir. 1990). Herein, the fortunes of individual investors in the Centra Tech ICO were directly tied to the failure or success of the products the Defendants purported to develop. An individual investor could exert no control over the success or failure of his or her investment. Thus, the Plaintiffs have established the existence of a common enterprise.

Finally, the third prong of the Howey test is satisfied when "the efforts made by those other than the investor are the undeniably [*15]  significant ones, those essential managerial efforts which affect the failure or success of the enterprise.'" Bamert v. Pulte Home Corp., 445 Fed. App'x 256, 262 (11th Cir. 2011) (quoting Williamson v. Tucker, 645 F.2d 404, 418 (11th Cir. 1981)); see also SEC v. Merchant Capital, LLC, 483 F.3d 747, 755 (11th Cir. 2007) ("'the focus is on the dependency of the investor on the entrepreneurial or managerial skills of a promoter or other party'") (quoting Gordon v. Terry, 684 F.2d 736, 741 (11th Cir. 1982)). Because the success of Centra Tech and the Centra Debit Card, CTR Tokens, and cBay that it purported to develop was entirely dependent on the efforts and actions of the Defendants, the third prong is satisfied. Therefore, the offering of Centra Tokens was an investment contract under the Securities Act, such that the Defendants sold or offered to sell securities by virtue of the Centra Tech ICO.



2. No Registration Statement In Effect
The Defendants have never disputed that there was no registration statement in effect as to the Centra Tokens sold at any time.



3. Interstate Means Were Used
Because it well-established that the Internet is an "instrumentality of interstate commerce,"5Link to the text of the note the Plaintiffs have established that interstate means were used to offer and sell the CTR Tokens. See ECF No. [26-4], Centra Tech Token Sale Home Page (providing visitors to the page with information on how to purchase Centra Tokens through the [*16]  Token Sale Home Page or via the Centra Tech Smart Contract).



4. Plaintiffs Have Suffered Recoverable Damages Under Section 12(a)(1)
Between September 21, 2017 and October 1, 2017, Plaintiff He purchased 702,269.4 CTR in exchange for Ether and Bitcoin valued at approximately $768,299.00, ECF No. [64] at 10. On December 17, 2017, Plaintiff He sold all of his CTR in exchange for Bitcoin valued at approximately $561,816.00, thus suffering a loss of approximately $206,483.00, ECF No. [64].6Link to the text of the note

Thus, the Plaintiff has shown (1) that the Defendants sold or offered to sell securities; (2) no registration statement was in effect as to the securities; (3) interstate means were used in connection with the offer or sale; and (4) that the Plaintiff suffered recoverable damages under Section 12(a)(1).



5. Defenses Raised by the Defendants
The Defendants have not yet filed an Answer in the instant action and rely on the arguments raised in their Motion to Compel Arbitration and/or Dismiss in opposition to the Plaintiff's Renewed Motion for Temporary Restraining Order. Therein, the Defendants argue that Plaintiff Rensel's claims are subject to a mandatory arbitration clause, that the Complaint should be dismissed because [*17]  Plaintiff Rensel failed to suffer recoverable damages, and that Count II of the Complaint, which alleges individual control person liability against the four individual defendants, should be dismissed for failure to state a claim. Because control person liability under Section 15 of the Securities is derivative of the Plaintiff's Section 12 claims,7Link to the text of the note and because the Plaintiff need only establish the likelihood of success on the merits as to a single claim to prevail on the motion for temporary restraining order,8Link to the text of the note the Defendants' argument for dismissal of the Section 15 claim need not be addressed herein.

Defendants argue in their Motion to Compel and/or Dismiss that Plaintiff Rensel lacks standing to bring a claim pursuant to Section 12(a)(1) of the Securities Act because Plaintiff Rensel profited from the sale of his Centra Tokens and thus has not suffered recoverable damages. As explained in more detail in the Report and Recommendation on the Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay and/or Dismiss, ECF No. [77], and summarized below, the undersigned concurs. Plaintiff Rensel purchased his Centra Tokens for 16.1 Ether, valued on the day of the purchase at $3,250.75, and sold them for 0.7096997 Bitcoin, valued on the day of the sale [*18]  at $3,517.00. Plaintiff Rensel, however, argues that because the Bitcoin he received upon sale of his Centra Tokens was sufficient to purchase only 13.723 Ether, he has suffered a loss in Ether. Because Plaintiff Rensel has sold and no longer holds his Centra Tokens, however, he is entitled only to monetary damages, not to rescission in the consideration he originally used in the purchase. See, e.g. In re Mutual Funds Inv. Litig., 384 F. Supp. 2d 845, 867 (D. Md. 2005) ("the only damages recoverable under Sections 11 and 12(a)(2) are based upon price differentials, and plaintiffs therefore have not stated any cognizable harm under those statutes"); Plumbers' & Pipefitters' Local No. 562 Supplemental Plan & Tr. v. J.P. Morgan Acceptance Corp. I, No. 08 CV 1713 ERK WDW, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 24106, 2012 WL 601448, at *8-10 (E.D.N.Y. Feb. 23, 2012) (dismissing claims under Section 12 because "[a]lthough the Lead Plaintiff has sufficiently alleged economic loss with respect to the Certificates generally, it is unable do so with respect to the two Certificates it sold for a profit or no loss"). Thus, Plaintiff Rensel has not suffered recoverable damages under Section 12(a)(1) and his claims are subject to dismissal. As previously referenced, however, Plaintiff He became a party to the action on April 9, 2018 and supports the Plaintiffs' Renewed Motion. Because Plaintiff He suffered a loss [*19]  of $206,483.00 upon the sale of his Centra Tokens, he has suffered recoverable damages under Section 12(a)(1).

The Defendants argument that Plaintiff Rensel is subject to mandatory arbitration also fails.9Link to the text of the note Though the Eleventh Circuit has recognized that the Federal Arbitration Act creates a presumption of arbitrability such that doubts regarding the scope of arbitration should be resolved in favor of arbitration, that presumption does not apply to the determination of whether an arbitration agreement exists, Dasher v. RBC Bank (USA), 745 F.3d 1111, 1115-16 (11th Cir. 2014). Plaintiff Rensel submitted a declaration stating that he did not agree to any terms and conditions in connection with his purchase of Centra Tokens and the Defendants have failed to provide competent evidence to demonstrate the existence of a genuine issue of material fact concerning the existence of the arbitration agreement. Therefore, Plaintiff Rensel is not subject to mandatory arbitration. Bazemore v. Jefferson Capital Sys., LLC, 827 F. 3d 1325, 1334 (11th Cir. 2016).

For the reasons stated above, which are addressed in more detail in this Court's Order on Defendant's Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay or in the Alternative Dismiss, ECF No. [77], the undersigned finds that at least Plaintiff He has established a substantial likelihood that he will prevail on the [*20]  merits of its claim for violation of Section 12.



B. Irreparable Harm Will be Suffered If the Relief is Not Granted
Second, Plaintiff must show that irreparable harm will be suffered if the injunctive relief sought is not granted.

Plaintiffs claim that without an injunction the Defendants will dissipate or abscond with the ICO proceeds and thus the Court will be unable to restore to the Plaintiffs the Ether they initially invested and any monetary damages awarded will be uncollectable. According to the Plaintiffs, the "egregious deceptive activities Defendants engaged in to solicit investments in the Centra Tech ICO and Defendant Sharma's history relating to alleged fraudulent activity indicate[] that the Defendants c[an] not be trusted to safeguard and manage the ICO proceeds pending resolution of the Action." ECF No. [54].

Plaintiffs, however, have put forth little evidence that their fears of future dissipation are well-founded, instead relying on the past fraudulent behavior of Defendant Sharma and the deceptive activities the Defendants engaged in in connection with the Centra Tech ICO, ECF No. [54] at 15-19. But safeguards have already been put in place that would prevent the Defendants from [*21]  dissipating the ICO proceeds. Prior to the initiation of this litigation, Defendants placed 99,931.325 Ether in a secure Ethereum public wallet (the "ICO Wallet"), the key to which was broken in half, the halves of which were stored in separate safety deposition boxes, one of which was accessible only by Allan Shutt, the General Counsel and Chief Compliance Officer of Centra Tech, Inc., and the other of which was accessible only by Robert Farkas, the Chief Operating Officer of Centra Tech, Inc. ECF No. [63], Response at 2.10Link to the text of the note

On April 1, 2018, Defendant Farkas was arrested and taken into federal custody. In connection with the criminal investigation of the Centra Tech ICO, the Department of Justice demanded that Centra Tech turn over the halves of the private key to the ICO Wallet. On April 11, 2018, Mr. Shutt met with agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and relinquished his half of the private key, ECF No. [63], Response at 3. On May 16, 2018, the defendants confirmed that the government had successfully accessed the ICO Wallet and transferred 91,000 Ether to a government-controlled digital wallet. ECF No. [72]. Following the government's transfer, 8,932.325 Ether remain in [*22]  the ICO Wallet.

The individual Defendants have all been arrested and charged with crimes related to the Centra Tech ICO. A review of the public record of the criminal case reflects that the Defendants have been released on bail. Though the Defendants have been released, they are all subject to significant bail conditions that decrease any risk of the harm feared by the Plaintiffs — the dissipation of the remaining funds in the ICO Wallet and other ICO related funds and/or the flight of the Defendants. USA v. Sharma et al., Case No. 1:18-cr-00340-LGS (S.D.N.Y. filed March 31, 2018).11Link to the text of the note All of the Defendants have posted multi-million dollar bonds in order to secure their release, signed by co-signers and secured by cash and/or property. All of the Defendants have surrendered their travel documents. Defendants Sharma and Farkas are prohibited from use or access to computers, smart phones, or the internet; Mr. Trapani's internet access is to be monitored. Thus, it does not appear that granting an injunction beyond that agreed to by the Defendants is necessary to prevent any irreparable injury to the Plaintiffs. In the absence of a showing that there is a current actual and imminent threat [*23]  to the ICO proceeds, the Plaintiff's concern is highly speculative. "Harm, in the context of an award of damages, is not irreparable if the injury to the plaintiff is remote or speculative (as opposed to actual or imminent)." Kebapci v. Tune Core Inc., No. 15-CV-7141 (ENV)(ST), 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 159054, 2016 WL 6804919, at *3 (E.D.N.Y. Nov. 16, 2016) (denying Plaintiff's request for preliminary injunction on basis of feared dissipation of assets because "a plaintiff must still allege facts (not conclusions) and provide evidence that the targeted defendants intend to frustrate judgment in the case at bar. Plaintiff's blanket contention that defendants are 'transferring their assets' and 'trying to avoid satisfying any judgment' does not suffice.") (internal citations omitted); see also Siegel, 234 F.3d at 1176-77 (movant must show that the irreparable injury is "neither remote or speculative, but actual and imminent.").

Moreover, though the Plaintiffs have indicated that the class may include individuals who seek rescission of the original Ether they paid for Centra Tokens, neither Plaintiff Rensel nor Plaintiff He are entitled to seek rescission, as both have already sold the CTR they purchased and are only entitled to damages. 15 U.S.C. 77l (claimant under statute [*24]  may "may sue either at law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction, to recover the consideration paid for such security with interest thereon, less the amount of any income received thereon, upon the tender of such security, or for damages if he no longer owns the security."). Plaintiffs Rensel and He, therefore, can seek only monetary damages in this action, and "[f]inancial damage alone is insufficient to warrant injunctive relief" based on the threat of irreparable injury.12Link to the text of the note Seiko Kabushiki Kaisha v. Swiss Watch Int'l, Inc., 188 F. Supp. 2d 1350, 1355 (S.D. Fla. 2002). "The possibility that adequate compensatory or other corrective relief will be available at a later date, in the ordinary course of litigation, weighs heavily against a claim of irreparable harm." Northeastern Fla., 896 F.2d at 1285 (citing Sampson v. Murray, 415 U.S. 61, 90, 94 S. Ct. 937, 39 L. Ed. 2d 166 (1974)); see also Kebapci v. Tune Core Inc., No. 15-cv-7141 (ENV)(ST), 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 159054, 2016 WL 6804919, at *3 (E.D.N.Y. Nov. 16, 2016) ("[A]n injury is not irreparable if a monetary award can provide adequate compensation.").

Without a finding of a likelihood of an "actual and imminent" irreparable injury, preliminary injunctive relief is improper. See Siegel, 234 F.3d at 1176 ("Significantly, even if Plaintiffs establish a likelihood of success on the merits, the absence of a substantial likelihood of irreparable injury would, standing alone, make preliminary injunctive relief improper."). Thus, [*25]  the Plaintiffs are not entitled to the additional injunctive relief sought.13Link to the text of the note The Defendants, however, have agreed to the entry of certain precautionary injunctive relief and the undersigned believes that entry of an Order providing the injunctive relief to which the Defendants have consented is appropriate.14Link to the text of the note



V. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
Therefore, in accordance with the above, it is hereby

RECOMMENDED that the Defendant's Renewed Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order, Asset Freeze, Document Preservation Order, and Order to Make Accounting and Other Ancillary Relief, ECF No. [54], be GRANTED to the limited extent consented to by the Defendants, and otherwise be DENIED; as follows:

An asset freeze is imposed over the contents of the ICO Wallet; and

Defendants Centra Tech, Inc., Sohrab Sharma, Raymond Trapani, Robert Farkas, and William Hagner, directly or indirectly, and whether alone or in concert with others, including any officer, agent, employee and/or representative of Centra Tech, and including any representative, agent, or heir of Defendant Hagner,15Link to the text of the note are enjoined from:

i. accessing the assets in the ICO Wallet for any purpose other than complying with a valid court order; [*26]  and

ii. destroying, erasing or otherwise making unavailable for further proceedings in this matter, any records or documents, books, records, accounts, account passwords, computer passwords, device PINS and passwords, cryptographic keys, or any instruments, data, and papers relating in any manner to Centra Tech and the Centra Tech ICO.

The parties will have fourteen calendar days from the date of this Report and Recommendation within which to file written objections for consideration by the United States District Judge to whom this case is assigned. Any response to objections must be filed within seven days from the date any objections are filed. Any request for an extension of these deadlines must be made within seven calendar days from the date of this Report and Recommendation. Pursuant to Eleventh Circuit Rule 3-1, and accompanying Internal Operating Procedure 3, the parties are hereby notified that failure to object in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) waives the right to challenge on appeal the district court's order based on unobjected-to factual and legal conclusions.

DONE AND SUBMITTED in chambers in Miami, Florida on June 25, 2018.

/s/ Andrea M. Simonton

ANDREA M. SIMONTON

UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The Defendants filed a Suggestion of Death as to William Hagner on April 12, 2018, noting that Mr. Hagner died on March 22, 2018, during the pendency of this action, ECF No. [60].

2Link to the location of the note in the document
The Plaintiff additionally sought a shortened briefing schedule for the instant motion, but that relief was addressed by the undersigned's Order of April 10, 2018, ECF No. [57].

3Link to the location of the note in the document
At the hearing, Plaintiffs' counsel explained that they sought a temporary restraining order rather than a preliminary injunction based upon the District Judge's comments at the hearing on their initial motion that indicated the preliminary injunction hearing would proceed more like a trial, and that their pending motion on discovery that was necessary to proceed in this manner had not been granted.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Though the Response explicitly consents to limited injunctive relief on behalf of Centra Tech, leaving some ambiguity as to the consent of the individual Defendants, during oral argument counsel for the Defendants confirmed that all Defendants consent to limited injunctive relief.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
See, e.g., SEC v. Levin, No. 12-cv-21917, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20027, 2013 WL 594736, at *12 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 14, 2013) ("the Internet, which necessarily includes email, is an 'instrumentality of interstate commerce.'") (quoting United States v. Hornaday, 392 F.3d 1306, 1311 (11th Cir. 2004)).

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Co-lead Plaintiff Wang Yun He was made a party to the action by Court Order on April 9, 2018, ECF No. [59], and fully supports the Renewed Motion. ECF No. [65] at 1.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Greenfield Children's P'ship v. FriendFinder Networks, Inc., No. 11-CV-81270, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200109, 2014 WL 12205997, *6 n.10 (S.D. Fla. Mar. 18, 2014) (noting that "Section 15 imposes derivative liability on certain 'control persons' for primary violations of the Securities Act" and dismissing claims under Section 15 because the complaint "fails to state a claim under the predicate Securities provisions").

8Link to the location of the note in the document
"In order to grant a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction in a case such as this, raising a number of separate claims for relief, it is sufficient if this court, finds that plaintiffs are likely to succeed on any of their claims, so long as the ultimate victory on this claim could be rendered relevant by the defendants' actions in the interim." Louis v. Meissner, 530 F. Supp. 924, 926 (S.D. Fla. 1981) citing Tenants for Justice v. Hills, 413 F. Supp. 389 (Ed.Pa.1975).

9Link to the location of the note in the document
The undersigned notes that, as to Plaintiff He, the Defendants contended that He was bound by an arbitration agreement and could not proceed in federal court. Plaintiff He was not the subject of the Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay and/or Dismiss, however, because He had not been made a party to the action at the time the Motion to Dismiss was filed; and an Amended Complaint formally naming He has not been filed and is the subject of a pending motion for leave to file an Amended Complaint.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
The Defendants contend the 99,931.325 Ether in the "ICO Wallet" is comprised of 51,000 Ether in ICO Proceeds, 40,000 Ether from Centra Tech's South Korean partner, and 8,931.325 Ether belonging to Centra Tech but unrelated to the ICO. ECF No. [63], Response at 2-3. The Defendants, however, have consented to an injunction as to all of the funds in the ICO Wallet. ECF No. [63] at 4 ("Centra Tech consents to an order enjoining Centra Tech from accessing the assets in the ICO Wallet for any purpose other than complying with the Seizure Warrant (and to a preliminary injunction of the same scope.").

11Link to the location of the note in the document
At any stage of a case and on its own, a court may judicially notice a fact that cannot be reasonably disputed because it either is generally known or can be readily and accurately determined from sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. Fed. R. Evid. 201(b)—(d). See, e.g., Fernandez—Morales v. Barron, No. 5:06cv1/MCR/EMT, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10573, 2006 WL 680819, at *2 (N.D. Fla. Mar.13, 2006) (a district court may take judicial notice of the public docket of a case pending in another federal judicial district).

12Link to the location of the note in the document
Moreover, it is unclear how many members of the class suffered a loss, as well as how many are subject to the arbitration provisions in certain sales contracts, and whether their claims would be subject to injunctive relief by the Court. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to establish that all proceeds and profits generated by the Centra Tech ICO are subject to injunctive relief by this Court.

13Link to the location of the note in the document
Because the undersigned concludes that the Plaintiffs have failed to establish irreparable injury, the remaining prerequisites to a preliminary injunction are not discussed. See, e.g., Northeastern Florida, 896 F.2d at 1285 ("We need not address each element because we conclude that no showing of irreparable injury was made.").

14Link to the location of the note in the document
With respect to the request for an accounting, the Plaintiffs should be able to obtain the necessary information through discovery, and may renew their motion if this is not the case. The records of business activities had been seized by the federal government at the time of the hearing and were not available to the Defendants.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
Although the parties have represented that Defendant Hagner is deceased, he remains a party to this case since no substitution or dismissal has occurred, and the recommendation is therefore drafted to encompass any representative or heirs of Defendant Hagner. The Texas State Securities Board issued the following news release:

U.S. state and Canadian securities regulators, continuing their crackdown on questionable cryptocurrency-related investments, have taken 47 enforcement actions against fraudulent investment promoters and opened more than 200 investigations since May 1.

The North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA), an organization of all U.S. state and Canadian provincial regulators, launched the regulatory sweep in response to a speculative mania in virtual currencies and investments tied to them.

In the last six months of 2017 the price of one bitcoin increased from $2,364 to an all-time high of $19,205, driving an increase in promoters illegally and fraudulently using online advertising, social media, and other public solicitations to attract investors. By the end of 2017 the market capitalization of all cryptocurrencies had skyrocketed to more than $500 billion.

In the regulatory sweep securities regulators uncovered extensive fraud in the market for Initial Coin Offerings and other suspect cryptocurrency offerings.

"We have learned that bad actors are leveraging widespread interest in cryptocurrencies to defraud the investing public," said Texas Securities Commissioner Travis J. Iles. "We'll continue to conduct thorough investigations, secure evidence and bring enforcement actions to protect Texans."

Please consult the State Securities Board's Cryptocurrency Resources for more information on the risks associated with investments tied to virtual currencies.

The investigations found that many promoters were not complying with registration laws and were concealing important information from investors, including the significant risks in cryptocurrency markets and the true identities of the managers of the investment programs.

In December Commissioner Iles entered an emergency order against USI-Tech, which was the first state action taken against a fraudulent promoter of cryptocurrency-tied investments.

The State Securities Board has taken a total of 11 enforcement actions against cryptocurrency promoters, effectively halting schemes in which companies claimed to have raised billions of dollars from investors. ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION
Plaintiff Telegram Messenger and Defendant Lantah LLC are both developing cryptocurrencies, and they are both planning to call their cryptocurrency "GRAM." Telegram seeks an injunction barring Lantah from using "GRAM." See MPI (dkt. 16). Telegram asserts that it has a common law right to the GRAM mark because it used the mark in commerce earlier than Lantah did. Id. Lantah opposes the motion for preliminary injunction, arguing that Telegram might have planned to use the GRAM mark, but it didn't, and therefore Lantah's trademark application renders Lantah the rightful owner of the mark. See Opp'n (dkt. 20). Because the Court agrees with Telegram, it GRANTS the motion.



I. BACKGROUND

A. Telegram's Actions
Telegram Messenger is a large company, [*2]  launched in 2013. Its messaging app focuses on speed and security and allows users to send messages, photos, videos and files via a variety of devices to groups of up to 100,000 people. See Perekopsky Decl. (dkt. 16-3) Ex. A ("Telegram FAQ") at 3. All chats are encrypted, and Telegram offers additional secret settings. Id. at 12. In early 2018, the Telegram Messenger app reached 200 million monthly active users worldwide. Perekopsky Decl. ¶ 4. It delivers billions of messages every day. Id. ¶ 5.

According to Telegram, most blockchains in existence today have "limitations that have prevented their associated cryptocurrencies from gaining widespread use," the most significant of which is that they aren't fully scalable, slowing down as users and transactions increase. Id. ¶ 7. Telegram is developing a new distributed ledger platform, the Telegram Open Network or "TON" Blockchain, which seeks to improve upon the existing systems. Id. ¶¶ 6, 8. Telegram intends for the "native cryptocurrency" on the TON Blockchain to be the GRAM. Id. And it intends to launch in the fourth quarter of 2018. Id. ¶ 6.

Telegram adopted the name GRAM sometime in 2017. Id. at 9. In December 2017, a number of articles reported on [*3]  Telegram's efforts to develop the TON Blockchain and GRAM cryptocurrency. See Hammon Decl. (dkt. 16-1) ¶ 2, Ex. A (articles from December 22, 2017 and December 27, 2017 reporting on development of TON Blockchain; "Cointelegraph learned that the currency of TON will be called 'Gram' and the platform will be natively integrated with many of the most popular messaging apps.").1Link to the text of the note Those articles continued into January 2018 and beyond. See, e.g., With Apple, the Tech Reckoning Gains Momentum: DealBook Briefing, The New York Times, January 9, 2018, at 7 (linking to Tech Crunch article, Josh Constine, Telegram plans multi-billion dollar ICO for chat cryptocurrency, https://techcrunch.com/2018/01/08/telegram-open-network, January 8, 2018).

Also in January 2018, Telegram began entering into purchase agreements with persons and firms, some within the United States, through which those persons and firms paid U.S. dollars or Euros in exchange for the right to receive an agreed upon number of GRAMs following the successful launch of the TON Blockchain. Perekopsky Decl. ¶ 10. On February 13, 2018, Telegram made a public filing with the SEC, disclosing that it had entered into purchase agreements [*4]  totaling $850 million, with the first purchase agreement executed in January 29, 2018. Hammon Decl. ¶ 3, Ex. B (stating that 81 persons or firms were in an offering of $850 million). The filing, which did not mention GRAMs by name, stated that the securities offered were "Purchase Agreements for Cryptocurrency." Hammon Decl. Ex. B at 17. It further disclosed that "[t]he issuers intend to use the proceeds for the development of the TON Blockchain, the development and maintenance of Telegram Messenger and other purposes described in the offering materials." Id. at 18-19. On March 29, 2018, Telegram made an additional filing with the SEC, disclosing a second $850 million offering of purchase agreements. Hammon Decl. ¶ 4, Ex. C. That form also did not mention GRAMs by name, stated that the securities offered were "Purchase Agreements for Cryptocurrency," and referenced the TON Blockchain. Id.

Telegram has not filed a trademark application for GRAM in the United States. Apparently, it did, in April 2018, file an application to register GRAM in the European Union, which Lantah is opposing. Thompson Decl. (dkt. 20-2) ¶¶ 10, 11, Exs. G, H, I, J.



B. Lantah's Actions
Lantah is a small company, started by 23-year [*5]  old Daniel Jeffery in Florida last Summer. See Jeffrey Decl. (dkt. 20-1) ¶¶ 1-2. "Ever since, Lantah has been building a borderless marketplace based on a cryptocurrency called the 'Gram.'" Id. ¶ 2. On September 18, 2017, Lantah announced on its website its intention to have an ICO (initial coin offering) for the Gram. Id. Ex. A ("The Lantah ICO Explained") ("Our release date is still [sic] future and in order to prepare for that event, we're giving you some things to help you understand the gram and how it will be used."); see also id. Exs. B, C (October 6, 2017 website announcement re Grams; November 15, 2017 website announcement re Grams).2Link to the text of the note

On February 25, 2018, Lantah filed an "intent to use" trademark application with the USPTO covering the mark GRAM for "financial services, namely, providing a virtual currency for use by members of an on-line community via a global computer network." Hammon Decl. Ex. F (indicating that trademark was filed pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1051(b)). The USPTO has found the mark entitled to registration and was set to publish it as of July 24, 2018. See Jeffery Decl. Ex. E. Lantah subsequently filed numerous similar applications in foreign jurisdictions, including China, [*6]  India, and South Korea. See Thompson Decl. ¶¶ 3-8, Exs. B, N-AD.

On March 9, 2018, Lantah initiated an ICO using the GRAM mark. Hammon Decl. ¶ 8, Ex. G ("The Lantah ICO PreSale (SAFT) Is Now Underway"). On the same day, Lantah submitted a filing with the SEC, representing that a final sale had yet to occur, that the total offering amount was $4,285,714, and that the total amount sold was $0. Hammon Decl. Ex. H at 54-55. Lantah also issued a press release relating to the Pre-ICO on March 14, 2018. See Counterclaim (dkt. 14) Ex. D ("Lantah Announces Pre-ICO Details for the First Blockchain-based Borderless Marketplace").



C. This Suit
Telegram filed suit against Lantah on May 11, 2018, asserting claims for false designation of origin, common law trademark infringement, and statutory unfair competition. See Compl. (dkt. 1). Lantah has counterclaimed. See Counterclaim. Telegram has filed the pending motion for preliminary injunction, asking the Court to enjoin Lantah "from using the 'GRAM' mark, or any confusingly similar marks, in connection with a cryptocurrency or the provision of a cryptocurrency product or service." See MPI; Proposed Order (dkt. 16-5) at 2. Lantah opposes the motion, [*7]  see Opp'n, and Telegram has filed a reply, see Reply (dkt. 22).

The Court notes that Lantah's opposition brief is actually a combined opposition and "Counter-Motion for Summary Judgment." See generally Opp'n. On the eve of the hearing for this motion, Lantah sought to consolidate the hearing with a hearing on its motion for summary judgment. See Ex Parte Application (dkt. 31). The Court denied that request. See Order Denying Ex Parte Application (dkt. 32). Accordingly, this order addresses only the motion for preliminary injunction.



II. LEGAL STANDARD
A preliminary injunction should issue where the plaintiff establishes that "he is likely to succeed on the merits, that he is likely to suffer irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief, that the balance of equities tips in his favor, and that an injunction is in the public interest." See Rodriguez v. Robbins, 715 F.3d 1127, 1133 (9th Cir. 2013). The Ninth Circuit evaluates these factors using a "sliding scale approach" such that "serious questions going to the merits and a balance of hardships that tips sharply towards the plaintiff can support issuance of a preliminary injunction, so long as the plaintiff also shows that there is a likelihood of irreparable injury and that the injunction [*8]  is in the public interest." Alliance for the Wild Rockies v. Cottrell, 632 F.3d 1127, 1135 (9th Cir. 2011).



III. DISCUSSION
Although the Court will consider all of the preliminary injunction factors, this dispute comes down to Telegram's likelihood of success on the merits, which in turn comes down to whether Telegram's actions leading up to Lantah's February 25, 2018, trademark application and its March 9, 2018, ICO constitute "use in commerce." The Court concludes that they do. Accordingly, Telegram has priority in the GRAM mark, and is likely to succeed on the merits. The other factors follow from there.



A. Likelihood of Success on the Merits
The first question in evaluating a motion for preliminary injunction is whether the party is likely to succeed on the merits. See Rodriguez, 715 F.3d at 1133. To succeed on a false designation of origin claim under the Lanham Act, a plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant "(1) use[d] in commerce (2) any word, false designation of origin, false or misleading description, or representation of fact, which (3) is likely to cause confusion or misrepresents the characteristics of his or another person's goods." AECOM Energy & Constr., Inc. v. Ripley, No. 2:17-cv-05398, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 160180 , 2017 WL 4326373, at *3 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 28, 2017) (quoting Freecycle Network, Inc. v. Oey, 505 F.3d 898, 902 (9th Cir. Cir. 2007)). If Telegram can demonstrate that it is likely to succeed on its false [*9]  designation claim under the Lanham Act, it has also demonstrated that it is likely to succeed on its common law and statutory unfair competition claims. See M2 Software, Inc. v. Madacy Entm't, 421 F.3d 1073, 1080 (9th Cir. 2005). As discussed below, Telegram is likely to succeed on the merits because it has demonstrated that it has priority in the mark, that Lantah used the mark in commerce after Telegram did, and that Lantah's use of the mark is likely to cause confusion.



1. Priority in the Mark
To establish that a party has priority in a particular mark over a rival user, it must show that it was the first to use the mark in commerce. One Indus., LLC v. Jim O'Neal Distrib., Inc., 578 F.3d 1154, 1158 (9th Cir. 2009) ("It is a cardinal principle of federal trademark law that the party who uses the mark first gets priority."). This is so even if the rival user has filed a trademark application: "[i]f another party can demonstrate that it used [a] mark before the holder filed its [intent-to-use trademark] application . . . then it may be entitled to an injunction." See WarnerVision Entm't Inc. v. Empire of Carolina, Inc., 101 F.3d 259, 262 (2d Cir. 1996); see also Grupo Gigante SA De CV v. Dallo & Co., 391 F.3d 1088, 1093 (9th Cir. 2004) ("It is 'not enough to have invented the mark first, or even to have registered it first.'") (quoting Sengoku Works Ltd. v. RMC Int'l, Ltd., 96 F.3d 1217, 1219 (9th Cir. 1996)). The Lanham Act protects the earlier "use of a mark in commerce." Grupo Gigante, 391 F.3d at 1093; 15 U.S.C.A. § 1127 (defining "use in commerce" to mean "the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary course [*10]  of trade, and not made merely to reserve a right in a mark"). It does not protect the earliest conception of the mark. See J. Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition § 16:11 ("An idea for a trademark is not a trademark.") (5th ed. 2018).

Lantah argues that Telegram does not have priority in the GRAM mark because it has "rendered no services and used no mark." See Opp'n at 8. Put slightly differently, at the motion hearing, Lantah's counsel stated that the sale of services not yet rendered is not a use in commerce. Lantah characterizes Telegram's actions as "private fundraising for prospective services," and argues that "priority does not arise from mere 'intent' or 'preparation' to use a mark in connection with prospective goods or services, absent an application to register the mark." Id.

Lantah is correct that preliminary steps, taken to prepare to use a trademark, do not constitute use in commerce. McCarthy on Trademarks § 16:12 ("The traditional rule is that use of a symbol in steps preliminary to establishing a business does not establish a priority date or a use sufficient for federal registration."). For example, the Ninth Circuit held that using a mark in emails with [*11]  lawyers and customers does not constitute use in commerce. See Brookfield Commc'ns, Inc, 174 F.3d at 1052. Nor does putting one's mark on an office door sign or letterhead, or on a prototype displayed to a potential buyer. Id. (discussing Steer Inn Sys., Inc. v. Laughner's Drive-In, Inc., 405 F.2d 1401, 1402, 56 C.C.P.A. 911 (C.C.P.A. 1969); Walt Disney Prods. v. Kusan, Inc., 204 U.S.P.Q. 284, 288 (C.D. Cal. 1979)). Indeed, Lantah cites to numerous cases in which courts have slapped down a party seeking to enforce a trademark because that party never actually sold its goods. See Opp'n at 8; see. e.g., Couture v. Playdom, Inc., 778 F.3d 1379, 1381-82 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (merely offering services, without rendering services, insufficient to establish use in commerce); Rolley, Inc. v. Younghusband, 204 F.2d 209, 211-12 (9th Cir. 1953) ("no evidence of a purchase [of appellant's product] . . . prior to appellees' registration"); Aycock Eng'g, Inc. v. Airflite, Inc., 560 F.3d 1350, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2009) ("sporadic steps in preparing to offer . . . service to the public," including creating corporate entity, obtaining toll-free numbers, and contracting with taxi operators, did not constitute use in commerce where service itself never sold).

Telegram offers two responses to Lantah's preparation argument: first, that the purchase agreements demonstrate use in commerce, see MPI at 6-7, and second, that it has engaged in sufficient pre-sale activity to earn it priority in the mark, see Reply at 7-10. The Court need not reach Telegram's second argument,3Link to the text of the note because it agrees with the [*12]  first.

Telegram argues persuasively that it did more than prepare to use the mark, it used it to the tune of millions of dollars in sales. Indisputably, even before Lantah filed its trademark application on February 25, 2018, Telegram had entered into purchase agreements through which purchasers paid U.S. dollars or Euros in exchange for the right to receive a contractually agreed upon number of GRAMs following the successful launch of the TON Blockchain. Perekopsky Decl. ¶ 10. Those purchase agreements were titled "PURCHASE AGREEMENTS FOR GRAMS," and required purchasers to pay the required funds "in full immediately" in exchange for Telegram's promise to issue coin to the purchaser on the network launch date. See Perekopsky Reply Decl. (dkt. 22-1) Ex. E at 6, ¶¶ 2.1, 2.2, 13.1. On February 13, 2018, Telegram informed the SEC that that first batch of purchase agreements totaled $850 million. Hammon Decl. ¶ 3, Ex. B.

Even small sales can be sufficient to constitute a use in commerce. See Dep't of Parks & Recreation for State of Cal. v. Bazaar Del Mundo Inc., 448 F.3d 1118, 1126 (9th Cir. 2006) ("While the first use need not be extensive, the use must be bona fide and commercial in character"); Allard Enterprises, Inc. v. Advanced Programming Res., Inc., 146 F.3d 350, 358 (6th Cir. 1998) ("As long as there is a genuine use of the mark in commerce, however, ownership may be established [*13]  even if the first uses are not extensive and do not result in deep market penetration or widespread recognition."); see also Seal Shield, LLC v. Otter Prod., LLC, No. 13-CV-2736-CAB (NLS), 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 185778, 2014 WL 11350295, at *7 (S.D. Cal. Nov. 4, 2014), aff'd sub nom. Seal Shield, LLC v. Otter Prods., LLC, 680 Fed. Appx. 560 (9th Cir. 2017) ("To this court's knowledge, the Ninth Circuit has never found a person's bona fide sales of marked goods insufficient to establish proprietary rights in a mark, where the sales were not made merely to reserve a mark."); but see Gamerologist Group, LLC v. Scientific Games Intern., Inc., 838 F. Supp. 2d. 141 (S.D.N.Y. 2011) aff'd 508 Fed. Appx. 31, 2013 WL 276078 (2d Cir. 2013) (sale for $30 each of four games bearing mark was "de minimis" and insufficient to confer rights). These were not small sales.

Lantah insisted at the motion hearing that the purchase agreements are inadequate to establish priority because they represent "private" purchases, and "the public has never seen the mark." That language, from Brookfield, followed the Ninth Circuit's explanation that "[t]he Lanham Act grants trademark protection only to marks that are used to identify and to distinguish goods or services in commerce—which typically occurs when a mark is used in conjunction with the actual sale of goods or services." See Brookfield Commc'ns, Inc., 174 F.3d at 1051. The court in Brookfield was reiterating that "trademark rights can vest even before any goods or services are actually sold" where [*14]  the totality of the circumstances so dictate, most often where there has been "widespread publicity of a company's mark." Id. at 1052. Here, unlike in Brookfield, there are extensive sales of goods/services, as well as numerous articles about Telegram's cryptocurrency. Even assuming that the quoted language in Brookfield applies, it is simply inaccurate to say that the public, particularly the appropriate segment of the public, see Chance, 242 F.3d at 1158, "has never seen" Telegram's use of the GRAM mark.

Lantah next argues that the sales are nonetheless irrelevant because "Telegram has not provided any cryptocurrency services under "Gram." Opp'n at 7. Undeniably, Telegram's GRAM has not yet issued. No matter. The purchase agreements are not mere agreements to invest some time in the future. Executed, binding purchase agreements "pursuant to which Telegram has already collected over $1.5 billion," and through which purchasers own vested subscription rights in GRAMS, demonstrate a use in commerce. See Reply at 2. Telegram certainly thought it had engaged in commerce when it recorded those sales with the SEC, see Hammon Decl. ¶ 3, Ex. B, and the purchasers certainly thought they had engaged in commerce when they sent [*15]  Telegraph their money. Moreover, the law supports the notion that the taking of orders, even without filling those orders, is a use. See, e.g., Geo. Washington Mint, Inc. v. Washington Mint, Inc., 349 F. Supp. 255, 260 (S.D. N.Y. 1972) (holding that plaintiff's customers having ordered substantial numbers of plates, even though plaintiff had not yet filled those orders, "makes out a use by the plaintiff of its mark for the purpose of determining priority"); New West Corp. v. NYM Co. of Cal., Inc., 595 F.2d 1194, 1200 (9th Cir. 1979) (noting 13,500 subscribers to magazine without mentioning whether subscription holders' magazines were in fact delivered).

The Court therefore concludes that the purchase agreements show Telegram using the GRAM mark in commerce prior even to Lantah's trademark application, and establish Telegram's priority in the mark.4Link to the text of the note



2. Lantah's Use of the Mark
To prevail on a false designation claim, a plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant used the infringing mark in commerce. See AECOM Energy & Constr., Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 160180 , 2017 WL 4326373, at *3 (quoting Freecycle Network, Inc., 505 F.3d at 902). There is no dispute over this point, and the Court finds that Lantah used the GRAM mark in commerce when it conducted its Pre-ICO token sale and filed a Form D with the SEC. See Hammon Decl. Ex. G (March 9, 2018 website announcement: "The Lantah ICO PreSale (SAFT) is Now Underway"); id. Ex. H (March 9, 2018 Lantah SEC [*16]  filing).



3. Likelihood of Confusion
A plaintiff must also demonstrate a likelihood of confusion in order to prevail on a false designation claim. See AECOM Energy & Constr., Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 160180 , 2017 WL 4326373, at *3 (quoting Freecycle Network, Inc., 505 F.3d at 902). The parties agreed at the motion hearing that there is no dispute on this point, and Lantah previously agreed that there is a likelihood of confusion. See Counterclaim ¶ 38 ("Lantah admits that there is a likelihood of confusion between the cryptocurrency services that the parties respectively intend to render under 'Gram.'"); Hammon Decl. Ex. I (June 21, 2018 email from Lantah's counsel: "Lantah has already alleged and admitted likelihood of confusion."). Nonetheless, the Court includes a brief analysis of the issue.

The test for likelihood of confusion is whether "a reasonably prudent consumer" in the marketplace is likely to be confused as to the origin of the good or service bearing one of the marks. Palantir Techs. Inc. v. Palantir.net, Inc., No. 07-3863 CRB, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 6448, 2008 WL 152339, at *2, *8 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 15, 2008). Courts analyzing likelihood of confusion look at eight factors: (1) the strength of the mark; (2) similarity of the marks; (3) proximity of the goods/services sold; (4) similarity in the marketing channels used; (5) the type of goods/services and the degree of care likely to be exercised by purchasers; (6) evidence of actual [*17]  confusion; (7) defendant's intent in selecting its mark; and (8) likelihood of expansion into other markets. See AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341, 348 (9th Cir. 1979).

The first Sleekcraft factor, strength of the mark, is determined with a two part test. The first part is conceptual strength. See McCarthy on Trademarks § 11:83. "GRAM" has conceptual strength because it is arbitrary—it makes no suggestion of what service it provides. The second part is commercial strength, or the marketplace recognition value of the mark. Id. Telegram has made little showing of GRAM's commercial strength. Under the second Sleekcraft factor, the two parties' marks are identical. This factor favors an injunction. The third and fourth Sleekcraft factors also favor an injunction: the two parties seek to use the exact same mark, GRAM, on the exact same product, cryptocurrency, in what will presumably be the same marketing channels. The fifth Sleekcraft factor, the type of goods, are exactly the same. The sixth Sleekcraft factor, evidence of actual confusion, weighs against an injunction, as there is no evidence that consumers of cryptocurrency are yet confused (or that many of them are aware of Lantah). The seventh Sleekcraft factor, the defendant's intent, is not [*18]  significant, as there is no evidence that Lantah read the articles or was otherwise aware of Telegram's cryptocurrency in advance of Lantah's development of its own cryptocurrency. The eighth and final Sleekcraft factor, likelihood of expansion into other markets, is also not very significant in this case, as the goods or services already compete. See Sports Authority, Inc. v. Prime Hospitality Corp., 89 F.3d 955, 963 (2d Cir. 1996).

In sum, though not all of the factors favor an injunction, customers will quite likely be confused by two companies using the same mark on the same goods in the same marketing channels. This is enough to conclude that there is a likelihood of confusion. See Honor Plastic Indus. Co. v. Lollicup USA, Inc., 462 F. Supp. 2d 1122, 1132 (E.D. Cal. 2006) (citing Lindy Pen Co. v. Bic Pen Corp., 796 F.2d 254, 257 (9th Cir. 1986) (clear error to find no likelihood of confusion where "two products with virtually identical marks are in the same market"); Park 'N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park and Fly, Inc., 782 F.2d 1508, 1509 (9th Cir. 1986) (injunction appropriate where two marks, "Park 'N Fly" and "Park and Fly," were "virtually identical, and the services provided by the two parties are precisely the same").

Because Telegram has demonstrated that it has priority in the mark, that Lantah used the mark in commerce, and that Lantah's use of the mark is likely to confuse customers, Telegram is likely to succeed on the merits of its claims.



B. Irreparable Harm
The second question in evaluating [*19]  a motion for preliminary injunction is whether the plaintiff faces irreparable harm. See Rodriguez, 715 F.3d at 1133. Courts cannot presume irreparable harm from a showing of likelihood of success on the merits of a trademark infringement claim. See Herb Reed Enters., LLC v. Fla. Entm't Mgmt., Inc., 736 F.3d 1239, 1248-49 (9th Cir. 2013). Nonetheless, here, there is no real dispute about irreparable harm. See Counterclaim ¶¶ 31, 36, 41 (alleging that Lantah faces irreparable harm if both parties are permitted to use the same mark); see also Future Domain Corp. v. Trantor Sys. Ltd., No. 93-812-THE, 1993 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 9177, 1993 WL 270522, at *10 (N.D. Cal. May 3, 1993) (finding that plaintiff had essentially "conceded" that opponent faced irreparable harm by requesting its own restraining order). Lantah argues only that "Telegram warrants no redress and suffers no harm because it enjoys no goodwill in 'Gram,'" citing to its likelihood of success arguments. See Opp'n at 11-12; see also Reply at 1 (noting that "the bulk of Defendant's arguments against an injunction rely on the mistaken position that Telegram's past activities do not qualify as use in commerce"). As the Court rejects Lantah's likelihood of success arguments, the Court also rejects this derivative argument.

Even if the Court were examining the irreparable harm question on a clean slate, however, there is ample [*20]  evidence of irreparable harm. See Paul Frank Indus., Inc. v. Sunich, 502 F. Supp. 2d 1094, 1102 (C.D. Cal. 2007) ("Infringing activity may lead to a loss of control over [plaintiff's] reputation and/or dilution of the goodwill that [plaintiff] has built up over the years. Such damage is difficult, if not impossible to measure or undo"). Irreparable harm is demonstrated where infringement will "cause Plaintiff to lose its ability to control its brand reputation and goodwill, since what could be perceived by consumers as the quality of Plaintiff's product risks no longer being within Plaintiff's control." Brooklyn Brewery Corp. v. Black Ops Brewing, Inc., 156 F. Supp 3d 1173, 1185 (E.D. Cal. 2016). Telegram has built up a reputation for cryptography and distributed computing, which it is trying to leverage in developing its cryptocurrency. See Perekopsky Decl. ¶¶ 2, 8, Ex. A. It has built some brand recognition in connection with the TON Blockchain and the GRAM mark, through its signing of $1.5 billion in purchase agreements, and the media coverage it has received. See Hammon Decl. ¶¶ 2-4. Lantah's use of GRAM for a competing cryptocurrency would harm the goodwill Telegram has in its mark, cause confusion about the source of the cryptocurrencies being developed, and, if Lantah's products are inferior, reflect adversely on Telegram's reputation. See Feldenkrais Guild of N. Am. V. Wildman, No. 18-cv-2340-YGR, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 86882 , 2018 WL 2331905, at *5 (N.D. Cal. May 23, 2018) [*21]  (granting injunction where defendant's use of mark "likely to result in . . . loss of the value associated with the [plaintiff's] Marks and [other] reputational harm, as well as loss of goodwill"). Telegram also faces the loss of prospective customers if Lantah is able to siphon off prospective Telegram customers. See Stuhlbarg Int'l Sales Co. v. John D. Brush & Co., 240 F.3d 832, 841 (9th Cir. 2001) ("evidence of threatened loss of prospective customers or goodwill certainly supports a finding of the possibility of irreparable harm").

Telegram has demonstrated that it risks irreparable harm.



C. Balance of Equities
The third question in evaluating a motion for preliminary injunction is whether the balance of the equities tips in the plaintiff's favor. See Rodriguez, 715 F.3d at 1133. Lantah argues that the balance of the equities disfavors Telegram, because Telegram is the junior user and can promptly change to another mark. Opp'n at 12 ("'Gram' is taken."). Because the Court rejects Lantah's argument as to priority of the mark, the Court also rejects this derivative argument. See Reply at 1 (noting that "the bulk of Defendant's arguments against an injunction rely on the mistaken position that Telegram's past activities do not qualify as use in commerce"). [*22]  Telegram asserted in its motion that "Unlike Telegram's extensive activity relating to its TON Blockchain and GRAM cryptocurrency and Purchase Agreements thus far, there is no evidence that Defendant has invested anywhere near the same amounts of time, energy, or resources in cultivating equity in the GRAM mark." MPI at 13; see also Perekopsky Decl. ¶ 9 (since 2017, Telegram "has . . . been using that mark in connection with its development of a cryptocurrency for use on the TON Blockchain, including providing purchase agreements in respect to of this cryptocurrency, and its development of software to provide access to financial products and services for customers on the TON Blockchain."). Lantah did not respond to this point in its opposition brief, or point to evidence of its own efforts. And there is no evidence that Lantah has made any sales in connection with its cryptocurrency, compared to the $1.5 billion in sales that Telegram has done. See Hammon Decl. Ex. H (Lantah SEC filing). It would be easier for Lantah to change its mark. See Philippe Charriol Int'l, Ltd. v. A'lor Int'l, Ltd., No. 13-cv-1257-MMA-BGS, 2014 WL 12279502, at *6 (S.D. Cal. Apr. 10, 2014), rev'd on other grounds, 611 F. App'x 890 (9th Cir. 2015) (reversing course at early stage unlikely to cause infringing [*23]  party permanent harm).

Telegram has demonstrated that the balance of equities tip in its favor.



D. Public Interest
The final question in evaluating a motion for preliminary injunction is whether the public interest favors an injunction. See Rodriguez, 715 F.3d at 1133. Lantah argues that the public interest requires the Court to deny the injunction because there is no merit to Telegram's case. See Opp'n at 12 (quoting Skydive Arizona, Inc. v. Quattrocchi, 673 F.3d 1105, 1116 (9th Cir. 2012) ("Courts should not enjoin conduct that has not been found to violate any law.")). Because the Court concludes that Telegram has priority in the mark and that Lantah's use of the mark is likely to confuse the public, the Court concludes that the public interest favors an injunction. See Internet Specialties W., Inc. v. Milon-DiGiorgio Enters., Inc., 559 F.3d 985, 993 (9th Cir. 2009) ("avoiding confusion to consumers" is the "usual public interest in trademark cases").

Telegram has therefore demonstrated that the public interest, as well as all of the other relevant factors, favors an injunction.



E. International Comity
Lantah maintains, however, that there is a further reason not to issue an injunction: "an extraterritorial injunction would cause a direct conflict with the law of every other sovereignty where [Lantah] has filed an application." Opp'n at 14. Lantah asserts that its numerous foreign [*24]  applications "collectively encompass the vast majority of the global population: over 82%," id. at 6, and argues that no objection should issue unless "the interests of, and links to, the United States . . . are sufficiently strong, vis-à-vis those of other nations, to justify an assertion of extraterritorial authority," id. at 12 (quoting Timberlane Lumber Co. v. Bank of America, N.T. & S.A., 549 F.2d 597, 613 (9th Cir. 1976), superseded by statute as stated in McGlinchy v. Shell Chem. Co., 845 F.2d 802 (9th Cir. 1988)).

This argument is easy to reject: "Telegram has not requested, and is not seeking, any order from this Court directed to activity taking place outside of the United States." Reply at 11. Moreover, to the extent that Lantah's argument could be stretched to mean that this Court should not issue even an injunction that is limited to the United States because such an injunction might have an extraterritorial effect, that argument also fails. Lantah's reliance on Star-Kist Foods, Inc. v. P.J. Rhodes & Co., 769 F.2d 1393 (9th Cir. 1985) is misplaced. See Opp'n at 14. While the Ninth Circuit in Star-Kist Foods found that the district court had "acted in accordance with principles of international comity and fairness in excluding wholly foreign commerce from the Lanham Act case before it," 769 F.2d at 1396, the court also affirmed the district court's injunction as to products "sold within the United States or exported from [*25]  the United States to either the Philippines or any other country," id. at 1394-95. The only injunction sought here pertains to Lantah's domestic use of the GRAM mark.

And certainly there can be no debate that this case has a domestic connection. Lantah is incorporated in Florida, has its headquarters in Florida, and has filed a trademark application with the USPTO. See Counterclaim ¶¶ 12, 35. Issuing an injunction limited to the United States is consistent with this Court's obligation to enforce domestic law, and with Lantah's own arguments about the purposes of the Paris Convention. See Opp'n at 13 (quoting McCarthy on Trademarks § 29:25 ("The [Paris] Convention is not premised upon the idea that the trademark laws of each member nation shall be given extraterritorial application, but on exactly the converse principle that each nation's law shall have only territorial application."); see also Grupo Gigante SA De CV, 391 F.3d at 1093 ("'priority of trademark rights in the United States depends solely upon priority of use in the United States, not on priority of use anywhere in the world'") (quoting McCarthy on Trademarks § 29:2).

The Court therefore rejects Lantah's argument about international comity.



IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court [*26]  GRANTS Telegram's motion and will issue a separate injunction limited to Lantah's use of the GRAM mark in the United States. Bond is set at $25,000. See Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 65(c).

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: August 8, 2018

/s/ Charles R. Breyer

CHARLES R. BREYER

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Lantah's counterclaim acknowledges these articles, see Counterclaim (dkt. 14) at 8 ¶ 15 ("In December 2017, reports began to emerge that Telegram also intended to launch a cryptocurrency named 'Gram.' Telegram did not publicly confirm these reports."), but Lantah asserts in opposing this motion that it only did so "after being served with copies in this case," and that it had no "contemporaneous knowledge" of the articles. See Opp'n (dkt. 20) at 10 n.8.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Despite having argued in opposing this motion that the date of its trademark application is what "matters," see Opp'n at 5, Lantah's counsel asserted at the motion hearing that Lantah's first use of the mark was far earlier, in "mid-2017." The Court has seen no evidence supporting that assertion, and does not consider the 2017 references on Lantah's website to be legally cognizable "use." See Brookfield Commc'ns, Inc. v. W. Coast Entm't Corp., 174 F.3d 1036, 1052-53 (9th Cir. 1999) (use of name on website with intent to use it commercially insufficient).

3Link to the location of the note in the document
That argument relies on the totality of the circumstances test, and cases like Chance v. Pac-Tel Teletrac Inc., 242 F.3d 1151, 1158 (9th Cir. 2001), which recognize that "advertising combined with other non-sales activity is sufficient to establish use in commerce." See Reply at 7-10. The Court is not aware of any evidence of Telegram's advertising in the record. Of course, there are articles in the record about Telegram's cryptocurrency efforts.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court further finds that Telegram has made continuous use of the mark since then, though the parties do not seem to dispute this point. See Airs Aromatics, LLC v. Victoria's Secret Stores Brand Management, Inc., 744 F.3d 595, 599 (9th Cir. 2014) ("To establish a protectable ownership interest in a common law trademark, the owner must 'establish not only that he or she used the mark before the mark was registered, but also that such use has continued to the present."); see generally Perekopsky Decl. (discussing purchase agreements and continued development efforts). In this in rem civil forfeiture action, Plaintiff United States of America (the "Government" or "Plaintiff") filed an Ex Parte Motion for Default Judgment and Final Judgment of Forfeiture (the "Motion") seeking entry of a default judgment against ten claimants, and a final judgment of forfeiture against all known and unknown potential claimants in the interests of several luxury vehicles, bank accounts, real properties, and millions of dollars in various cryptocurrencies. The ten known claimants in this matter are Martin Cazes, Danielle Heroux, KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited, Nonsuch Management Limited, Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes), The Estate of Alexandre Cazes, [*2]  Hatrox Limited, and Yaman Properties Co. Limited (collectively "Known Claimants"). (Doc. 53 at 1-2.) Plaintiff seeks a final judgment of forfeiture of the following assets and properties:

1. 2013 Lamborghini Aventador LP700-4, VIN: ZHWEC1476CLA01032, Bangkok Registered Plate Number: 4 Kor Kai Tor Tung - 3620 Bangkok,

2. Porsche Panamera S, VIN: WP0ZZZ97ZGL040783, Bangkok Registered Plate Number: 5 Kor Kai Tor Tung - 1923 Bangkok,

3. Mini Cooper, Bangkok Registered Plate Number: 5 Kor Kai Phophan - 2319 Bangkok,

4. BMW Motorcycle, License Plate Number: 5 Kokai Nonen - 2182 Bangkok,

5. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Bangkok Bank, held in the name of Alexandre Cazes, including but not limited to accounts 228-2-15349-9, 228-2-15092-5 and 033-0-79683-0,

6. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Bangkok Bank, held in the name of Sunisa Thapsuwan, including but not limited to account 935-7-00049-7,

7. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Bank of Ayudhya (Krungsri), held in the name of Alexandre Cazes, including but not limited to account 7241012818,

8. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Kasikorn Bank, held in the name of Alexandre Cazes, including but not limited [*3]  to accounts 007-3-86968-4,

9. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Kasikorn Bank, held in the name of Sunisa Thapsuwan, including but not limited to account 073-2-53870-4,

10. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Siam Commercial Bank, held in the name of Alexandre Cazes, including but not limited to accounts 156-1-12047-0 and 156-2-73157-5,

11. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Siam Commercial Bank, held in the name of Sunisa Thapsuwan, including but not limited to account 192-2-06800-9,

12. All monies, funds, and credits on deposit at Bank Alpinum AG in Liechtenstein, held in the name of Alexandre Cazes,

13. Real property located at 514, Soi 28 off Phutta Monthon Sai 3 Road Khwaeng Sala Thammasop, Khet Thawee Watthana, Bangkok, Thailand,

14. Real property located at 522, Soi 28 off Phutta Monthon Sai 3 Road Khwaeng Sala Thammasop, Khet Thawee Watthana, Bangkok, Thailand,

15. Real property located at Villa Torcello, 28/18 Moo 6, Kamala, Kathu, Phuket 83150, Thailand,

16. Real property located at 1399/8 Granada Pin Klao-Phet Kasem Housing Estate, Kanchana Phisk Road, Khwaeng Bang Khae Nua, Khet Bang Khae, Bangkok, Thailand,

17. Real property located at Villa 1 at the [*4]  Sea Pearl Residences, Paralimni Famagusta, Cyprus,

18. Real property located at #302 Nonsuch Bay Condominiums (C-20080017, LOT #9), St. Phillips South, Antigua and Barbuda,

19. Approximately 1,605.0503851 Bitcoins seized from Alexandre Cazes and moved to secure government-controlled Bitcoin addresses: 18yWFVddqNrGE966zwXTpyJgYJgr82SvMs (837.81699505 BTC) and 1NXoCQLQqgaQU2cpBGtXTZ8NVm1cGnYD6p (721.76756789 BTC),

20. Approximately 8,309.271639 Ethereum seized from Alexandre Cazes and moved to secure government-controlled Ether address: 0x41CC3B9213DE6FF4a8Ea85306326B00D18145E65,

21. Approximately 3,691.98 Zcash seized from Alexandre Cazes and moved to secure government-controlled address: t1L5QRksQxTXCB1niqp3JEu4fWTZD8W2a94 (formerly described as t1UAr3j9Hyt1oCMygsSLr7S3pLMuKBoNgLg),

22. Any and all Monero seized from Alexandre Cazes' personal computer and wallet addresses,

23. Approximately 293.79476862 Bitcoin moved from server 3203 into secure government-controlled Bitcoin address: 1BBTk41STWuffTfvRrsovX7X8puhDpFofk,

24. Approximately 43.05943697 Bitcoin moved from server 3164 into secure government- controlled Bitcoin address: 1BBTk41STWuffTfvRrsovX7X8puhDpFofk,

25. Approximately 360.384477 [*5]  Ethereum moved from server 8131 into secure government-controlled Ether address: 0x356114879f72f4bFFB343B0003DEED7944B4D31d,

26. Approximately 11,993.15882 Monero moved from server 10073 into secure government-controlled Monero address: 47gSEo9DJCZfsYrPijJ1QpLksePfjNoBA6mUtQXAW6xBVz6GwEkgYaQf2PDBhm5fXUfozLWYpCxK2FmyZ29bWmZBKhXqKZo,

27. Any and all cryptocurrency contained in wallet files residing on AlphaBay servers, including the servers assigned the internet protocol addresses: XX.XXX.XX.146 ("Server 11205"), XX.XXX.XXX.163 ("Server 6223"), XXX.XXX.XXX.225 ("Server 3203a"), XXX.XXX.XXX.61 ("Server 3203b"), XXX.XXX.XXX.77 ("Server 3164"), XX.XXX.XXX.130 ("Server 8131"), XX.XXX.XX.168 ("Server 10073 "), and

28. Any and all cryptocurrency seized from the personal computer, wallet addresses, and media of Alexandre Cazes.

(collectively, the "Defendant Assets") (Doc. 53, Ex. A). No opposition to the Motion has been filed, and the time to file an opposition has expired. For the reasons set forth below, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that the Government's Motion be GRANTED.


II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND1Link to the text of the note

A. AlphaBay Background
On July 26, 2017, the Government filed a verified first amended complaint alleging [*6]  that between December 2014 and July 2017, the AlphaBay hidden website served as a marketplace for illegal goods—selling malware, controlled substances, chemicals, guns, stolen financial information and counterfeit documents to its users located all over the world including in the Eastern District of California. (Doc. 3 ("Am. Compl." ¶¶ 3, 4.) An individual named Alexandre Cazes, a/k/a "Alpha02," a/k/a "Admin," founded AlphaBay in 2014 and was its leader through July 4, 2017. (Id. ¶ 6.) Cazes oversaw AlphaBay's operations since its inception and controlled the profits generated from the operation of the business, collecting tens of millions of dollars in commissions from the illegal transactions facilitated by AlphaBay. (Id.) Cazes was aware of the illegal nature of his enterprise—in 2014, he posted in the "About Me" section of AlphaBay that the site was "launched in September 2014 and its goal is to become the largest eBay-style underworld marketplace." (Id.)

AlphaBay was designed to facilitate the illicit commerce hosted on the site by providing anonymity to its users, in two primary ways. (Id. ¶ 5.) First, the AlphaBay hidden website operated on the dark web accessible only through [*7]  "The Onion Router" network, a special network of computers on the internet designed to conceal the true IP addresses of the computers on the network. (Id.) Second, AlphaBay required its users to transact in cryptocurrencies, also referred to as digital currencies, such as Bitcoin, Monero, and Ethereum. (Id.)

AlphaBay was modeled after conventional e-commerce websites. (Id. ¶ 9.) In exchange for a vendor fee, users could establish vendor profiles and offer goods for sale online. (Id.) As of June 2017, there were approximately 369,000 listings for the sale of various categories of illicit goods on the AlphaBay website. (Id. ¶ 10.) Not only were the goods and services offered on AlphaBay overwhelmingly illegal on their face, but the illicit nature of the commerce conducted on the website was openly recognized in the AlphaBay online community and on the site itself. (Id. ¶ 11.) For example, information available on AlphaBay provided guidance to users concerning how to conduct transactions on the site without being caught by law enforcement. (Id.)

During its operation, AlphaBay charged a commission for every transaction conducted by its users. (Id. ¶ 13.) The commission rate varied based [*8]  on the seller's history, volume, and trust level on the site, and generally ranged from 2-4%. (Id.) AlphaBay also offered a referral program whereby a user received a portion of the commission earned from users referred to the site, thereby encouraging existing users to introduce new users to the site and increase the sales volume. (Id.) In addition, AlphaBay kept the value of Bitcoin or other cryptocurrency left behind by users who were banned from the site or otherwise abandoned their AlphaBay accounts. (Id.)

Transactions on AlphaBay occurred through cryptocurrencies hosted and controlled by the site. (Id. ¶ 16.) To purchase illegal goods and services, users transferred funds into the site's cryptocurrency addresses, where the funds were held in escrow until the transactions were completed. (Id.) After a transaction was completed, and AlphaBay took its commission, users could send their cryptocurrencies to private addresses not controlled by the site. (Id.) Because cryptocurrency transactions can in theory be traced using a public ledger maintained by peer-to-peer verification, "tumblers" and "mixers" could be used to obscure the historical trail of the cryptocurrencies' movements. [*9]  (Id.) Mixers and tumblers obscure transaction histories by combining, splitting and re-combining Bitcoins through a series of wallets controlled by the tumbler or mixer. (Id.) According to postings on AlphaBay, the site introduced a tumbler to help users obscure their cryptocurrency transactions in approximately April 2016. (Id.)



B. Law Enforcement's Investigation of AlphaBay and Alexandre Cazes
Between May 2016 and June 2017, United States law enforcement agents made numerous undercover purchases of controlled substances (marijuana, heroin, fentanyl, and methamphetamine), fake identification documents and an ATM skimmer from AlphaBay vendors, including purchases from, and substances and other illegal items shipped to, the Eastern District of California. (Id. ¶ 17.) In the course of their investigation, law enforcement agents identified Alexandre Cazes as "Alpha02" and "Admin," the founder and administrator of AlphaBay. (Id. ¶ 18.) According to AlphaBay's FAQs, "AlphaBay Market . . . [was] founded by alpha02, reputable member on most carding forums . . . [a]fter some time helping others on carding forums, he decided to start his own marketplace and allow sellers from around the world [*10]  to sell goods to buyers worldwide." (Id.) In August 2015, the username for the AlphaBay administrator account changed from "Alpha02" to "Admin." (Id. ¶ 20.) The AlphaBay profile for Admin at the time the site was taken down showed that it was the same account previously labeled "Alpha02" and that moniker was simply changed. (Id.)

In December 2016, law enforcement learned that Cazes' personal email was included in the header of AlphaBay's "welcome email" to new users in December 2014. (Id. ¶ 21.) Specifically, soon after AlphaBay was launched, the site established an associated online forum allowing customers and vendors to discuss their business. (Id.) One feature of the sign-up process was new users had to provide an email address for password recovery in case the user lost his/her password. (Id.) Once new users joined the forums and entered their private email accounts, they were greeted with an email directly from AlphaBay welcoming them to the forums. (Id.) The email address of "Pimp_Alex_91@hotmail.com" was included in the header information of the AlphaBay welcome email. (Id.) Cazes' personal email was also included in the header of AlphaBay's "password recovery process" used [*11]  by AlphaBay forum users who lost their passwords. (Id. ¶ 22.)

Law enforcement subsequently learned the "Pimp_Alex_91@hotmail.com" email address belonged to a Canadian man named Alexandre Cazes with a birthdate of October 19, 1991. (Id. ¶ 23.) Cazes was a self-described independent website designer affiliated with a company called EBX Technologies. (Id.) Law enforcement uncovered additional facts indicating that Cazes was "Alpha02," including financial transaction information linking Cazes to AlphaBay and financial records indicating that Cazes had many millions of dollars' worth of investments throughout the world without any lawful source. (Id. ¶ 25.) Additionally, Cazes was logged into the AlphaBay website as "Admin" on July 5, 2017, when law enforcement executed a search warrant at his residence, and was in active communication with one of the AlphaBay data centers about a law enforcement-created service outage on the site. (Id.) Finally, passwords to AlphaBay's servers and other infrastructure were found on Cazes' personal computer at his residence. (Id.)

Law enforcement further determined that Cazes owned and controlled EBX Technologies, a front company he used to justify his banking [*12]  activity and substantial cryptocurrency holdings. (Id. ¶ 26.) Although EBX Technologies claims to provide web design services, the website for EBX Technologies is barely functional and does not appear to support any substantial business operations. (Id.) A review of EBX Technologies' current bank records show little to no business income or banking activity. (Id.) In the years before his arrest, Cazes maintained several bank accounts in the name of "EBX Technologies" and used these "business" bank accounts to create digital exchange accounts so he could liquidate and manage his cryptocurrency. (Id.)



C. Related Criminal Case
On June 1, 2017, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California issued a warrant for Cazes' arrest based upon an Indictment in United States v. Alexandre Cazes case number 1:17-cr-00144-LJO-SKO, charging Cazes with sixteen criminal counts, including conspiracy to engage in a racketeer influenced corrupt organization, in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 1962(d); conspiracy to violate the narcotics laws of the United States in violation of Title 21, United States Code, Sections 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(A), (b)(1)(C), & 846; conspiracy to commit identity theft and access device fraud in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Sections 1028(f) and 1029(b)(2); unlawful transfer of [*13]  a false identification document in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Sections 1028(a)(2), (b)(1)(A)(ii), & (f); trafficking in device making equipment in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Sections 1029(a)(4), (b)(1), and (c)(1)(A)(ii); and conspiracy to commit money laundering in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 1956(h). (Id. ¶ 28.) The Indictment against Cazes further sought to forfeit all the assets connected to the criminal organization known as AlphaBay. (Id.) On April 27, 2018, the Court dismissed all sixteen counts of the Indictment following Cazes' death. (See Case No. 1:17-cr-00144-LJO-SKO (Docs. 10, 11).)



D. Seizure Warrants
On June 20, 2017, a federal judge found probable cause existed to seize a luxury vehicle and eleven bank and cryptocurrency exchange accounts traceable to unlawful proceeds generated from AlphaBay, and issued seizure warrants for those assets located in Thailand. (Am. Compl. ¶ 31.) Law enforcement traced Bitcoin transactions originating with AlphaBay to digital currency accounts, and ultimately bank accounts and other tangible assets, held by Cazes and his wife, Sunisa Thapsuwan. (Id.) Cazes concealed and disguised funds obtained illicitly through AlphaBay by commingling the criminal proceeds in digital currency exchange accounts and bank accounts controlled by Cazes and his [*14]  wife, and using an automated mixing and tumbling procedure designed to conceal the source of the criminal funds when converting Bitcoin (and other cryptocurrencies) to currency. (Id.)

The warrants sought the seizure of assets connected to Cazes in Thailand, Liechtenstein, and the Republic of Cyprus where Cazes pursued economic citizenship by purchasing expensive real property in the country. (Id. ¶ 32.) In Thailand, where Cazes lived with his wife, law enforcement identified numerous bank and digital exchange accounts connected to Cazes containing ill-gotten proceeds from the operation of AlphaBay. (Id.) Cazes used the digital exchange accounts to liquidate his cryptocurrency, most often Bitcoin, to currency, so he could freely spend it in Thailand and other countries on luxury cars, real estate holdings, and other assets. (Id.)



E. July 5, 2017, Arrest and Search in Thailand
On July 5, 2017, the Royal Thai Police executed an arrest warrant for Alexandre Cazes, as well as a search warrant, with assistance from the FBI and DEA, at his primary residence in Bangkok, Thailand. (Id. ¶ 33.) At the time of his arrest, law enforcement discovered Cazes' laptop open and in an unencrypted state. [*15]  (Id.) The laptop was in Cazes' bedroom and logged into the AlphaBay forums and the server that hosted the AlphaBay website under the username "Admin." (Id.)

With the computer unlocked and unencrypted, the Royal Thai Police, FBI and DEA searched Cazes' computer and found several open text files that identified the passwords/passkeys for the AlphaBay website, all of the AlphaBay servers, and other online identities associated with AlphaBay. (Id. ¶ 34.) As a result of the password discovery, law enforcement seized all the information and cryptocurrency on the AlphaBay servers. (Id.) The Royal Thai Police, FBI and DEA also discovered a file on Cazes' computer that identified the value and location of Cazes' assets obtained from AlphaBay. (Id. ¶ 35.) The document was modeled after a personal financial statement—listing "TOTAL NET WORTH" in bold at the top of the document. (Id.) Below the net worth heading, Cazes broke down his "holdings" into various subcategories such as "Asset holdings," "Cash holdings," as well as by each distinct cryptocurrency (e.g., Bitcoin, Ethereum, Monero, and Zcash) and method of storage. (Id.) According to his financial statement, Cazes had a net worth of $23,033,975. [*16]  (Id.)

Under the "Assets" heading of the document, Cazes identified four vehicles and six real properties that he valued at more than $12.5 million. (Id. ¶ 36.) Cazes' own list of hard assets matched law enforcement's understanding of Cazes' purchases of luxury vehicles and foreign real estate. (Id.) Cazes identified several real estate holdings in Thailand, including the residence searched by law enforcement and the adjacent villa he purchased for his in-laws. (Id.) Cazes also identified a vacation property he purchased in Phuket, Thailand, and a new home being built in the Granada Pinklao-Phetkasem housing estate in Bangkok, Thailand, as well as luxury foreign properties in Antigua and Barbuda ("Antigua") and in Cyprus, where he was attempting to obtain economic citizenship by purchasing expensive real property. (Id.) Cyprus allows for the purchase of citizenship with a direct investment of at least €2 million in real estate and law enforcement intercepted a package Cazes sent to Cyprus indicating he transferred €2.38 million to a bank in Cyprus for the purchase of a villa in that country. (Id.) Cazes previously obtained economic citizenship in Antigua based on a $400,000 investment [*17]  in Antiguan beachfront property that qualified for the country's citizenship by investment program. (Id.)

The "Assets" portion of Cazes' document also identified the luxury vehicles he purchased and drove in Thailand, where the cost is double or triple the cost of comparable vehicles in the United States or Europe. (Id. ¶ 37.) Cazes identified a "Lambo," meaning a Lamborghini, which he purchased for over $900,000, a "Mini" Cooper his wife used valued at $81,000, a BMW motorcycle worth $21,000, and a Porsche Panamera worth $292,957. (Id.)

Cazes' financial statement next identified "Banks" and categorized his bank holdings by the first initial of each Thai financial institution: "K" for "Kasikorn Bank," "B" for "Bangkok Bank," and "S" for "Siam Bank." (Id. ¶ 38.) Each abbreviation identified a balance that matched law enforcement's analysis of Cazes' bank holdings in Thailand. (Id.) Written below the Thai bank accounts and balances were Cazes' foreign bank accounts, including an account in Switzerland containing $781,000 and several accounts at Loyal Bank Limited, a private offshore bank located in St. Vincent and the Grenadines. (Id.)

Cazes' financial statement identified cash holdings [*18]  of over $770,000 and $6.5 million in cryptocurrency. (Id. ¶ 39.) Similar to the bank abbreviations, Cazes abbreviated his cryptocurrency holdings—"BTC" for Bitcoin, "ETH" for Ethereum, "XMR" for Monero, and "ZEC" for Zcash. (Id.) Written next to these wallet addresses were the "private keys" that allowed law enforcement to unlock the controls and move the cryptocurrency within each wallet address to a secure government-controlled address. (Id.) In total, from Cazes' wallets and computer, agents took control of approximately $8,800,000 in Bitcoin, Ethereum, Moreno, and Zcash, broken down as follows: 1,605.0503851 Bitcoin, 8,309.271639 Ethereum, 3,691.98 Zcash, and an unknown amount of Monero. (Id.)

Cazes' computer also contained documents showing his involvement and ownership of a company named "Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited." (Id. ¶ 40.) In a document titled, "Resolution of Board of Directors of Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited" an "attorney-in-fact" authorizes "the Company" to open a bank account at Loyal Bank Limited. (Id.) Cazes is identified as "the Company" and sole authorized user of the bank account at Loyal Bank. (Id.) The document is dated February 15, 2017. (Id.)



F. [*19]  Search and Seizure of AlphaBay Servers
Law enforcement also identified and seized certain servers that hosted AlphaBay cryptocurrency wallets including servers 3203a/b, 3164, 8131, 10073 listed in the Defendant Assets. (Id. ¶ 41.) Server 3203a/b hosted an encrypted container with unencrypted bitcoin wallets containing approximately 293.79476862 Bitcoin. (Id.) Server 3164 hosted Bitcoin Node that included an encrypted container with a bitcoin wallet. (Id.) The wallet itself was not encrypted and law enforcement found total of approximately 43.25943697 Bitcoin. (Id.) Server 8131 hosted an encrypted container that included 3,525 Ethereum keypairs totaling 360.384477 Ethereum. (Id.) Server 10073 hosted an encrypted container that included an unencrypted Monero wallet with one address holding a balance of 11,993.15882 Monero. (Id.) In addition to the cryptocurrency seizures from Servers 3203a/b, 3164, 8131, 10073, law enforcement also seized information and cryptocurrency from IP addresses containing AlphaBay's complete universe of cryptocurrency. (Id.)



G. Economic Citizenship Seizures
At the time of his arrest, Cazes had successfully obtained economic citizenship in at least one country and [*20]  was in the process of completing a second economic citizenship investment. (Id. ¶ 43.) The first, in Antigua, involved Cazes completing a citizenship application for Antigua and wiring $400,000 from his account at Bangkok Bank to purchase Villa 302 at Nonsuch Bay Condominiums in St. Phillip's South, Antigua. (Id.) The Antiguan government identifies Nonsuch Bay Condominiums as a qualifying real estate project for the country's citizenship by investment program. (Id.) In exchange for his $400,000 investment, Cazes and his wife were issued Antiguan passports in February 2017. (Id.)

In April 2017, Cazes mailed a package from Bangkok to Bank Alpinum AG in Liechtenstein. (Id. ¶ 44.) The package contained a contract and related instructions for the transfer of €3 million to Bank Alpinum AG in Liechtenstein, as well as documents indicating a €2.38 million transfer from Cazes to USB Cyprus for the purchase of a villa in that country. (Id.) In the "Declaration of Source of Funds" associated with the transaction in Liechtenstein, Cazes identified the funds transfer would originate from his account at Bitcoin Suisse AG in Baar, Switzerland. (Id.) To verify his relation to Bitcoin Suisse AG and [*21]  the details of payment from the account, Cazes declared his occupation was a "Real estate / Bitcoin invest[or]" and a "customer" of the bank who "sen[t] them Bitcoins, and they send USD or EUR wire transfers," exchanging Cazes' cryptocurrency for currency. (Id.) Cazes signed the form and "declare[d] the information was true and correct," and his wife signed the Declaration as a "Witness." (Id.)

Following a review of the contents of Cazes' package, law enforcement verified that Cazes made three wire transfer payments to Henley and Partners Cyprus Ltd (€714.00), M.C. Corporate Services Ltd (€6,087.00), and Idania Enterprises Ltd (€4,000.00). (Id. ¶ 45.) Each transaction corresponded to Cazes' efforts to obtain economic citizenship in Cyprus—payments for a travel consultant, to create a holding company for the property purchased to obtain economic citizenship in Cyprus, and corporate services for Cazes' holding company (naming a Registered Office, Corporate Secretary, Nominee Director, and Nominee Shareholder). (Id.) Additionally, when he made the wire transfers, Cazes had written instructions on how to begin the purchase of Villa 1 located at the Sea Pearl Residences in Cyprus. (Id.) [*22]  One document was a printout of an email from Cazes' travel consultant identifying the amounts to wire transfer to Cyprus to begin the villa purchase, including instructions that Cazes must provide "the seller" with €4,000.00 to open the transaction. (Id.)



III. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On June 1, 2017, a Grand Jury in the Eastern District of California indicted Alexandre Cazes, a/k/a "Alpha02," a/k/a "Admin," for conspiracy to engage in a racketeer influenced corrupt organization, in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 1962(d) and 846, and other charges related to his role at AlphaBay. (Id. ¶ 28.) On April 26, 2018, the Government moved to dismiss the Indictment following Cazes' death in July 2017. (see Case No. 1:17-cr-00144-LJO-SKO (Doc. 10).) The Court dismissed all sixteen counts of the Indictment on April 27, 2018. (see 1:17-cr-00144-LJO-SKO (Doc. 11).)

On July 19, 2017, the Government filed a verified civil complaint seeking forfeiture in rem pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 981(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C), and 21 U.S.C. § 881(a)(6) of the Defendant Assets, (Doc. 1), and on July 26, 2017, the Government filed an amended verified complaint on the same grounds, (Doc. 3). Based on the allegations set forth in the amended complaint, the Clerk of the Court issued a Warrant for Arrest of Articles In Rem for the Defendant [*23]  Assets. (Doc. 4.)

On August 10, 2017, this Court issued an order authorizing public notice of this forfeiture action for thirty consecutive days on the official internet government forfeiture site www.forfeiture.gov. (Doc. 7.) Publication in a manner consistent with this Court's order began on September 27, 2017, and ran for at least thirty consecutive, as required by and Supplemental Rule G(4)(a) of the Supplemental Rules for Admiralty or Maritime Claims and Asset Forfeiture Actions (hereafter "Supplemental Rules") and Local Rule of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California 500(d). (Doc. 13.) Proof of such publication was filed with the Court on October 27, 2017. (Id.) The Government also caused notice to be delivered to various individuals with a suspected potential interest in the Defendant Assets in a manner reasonably likely to reach them, as follows:

1. On September 29, 2017, the Government mailed Cazes' mother, Danielle Heroux, copies of the amended complaint, notice of complaint, warrant for arrest, application and order for publication, notice of related cases, order setting mandatory scheduling conference, standing order in all civil cases assigned to District Judge Lawrence J. O'Neill, and [*24]  court notices (hereafter "complaint documents") by Federal Express ("FedEx") delivery to her address in Canada. (See Doc. 53-2, Declaration of Tammy Teglia in Support of Ex Parte Motion for Default Judgment and Final Judgment of Forfeiture ("Teglia Decl.") ¶ 4.) FedEx records show the package was delivered to Danielle Heroux on October 2, 2017. (Id.)

2. On September 29, 2017, the Government mailed Alexandre Cazes' father, Martin Cazes, the complaint documents by FedEx delivery to his address in Canada. (See Teglia Decl. ¶ 3.) FedEx records show the package was delivered to Martin Cazes on October 3, 2017. (Id.)

3. On November 21, 2017, the Government mailed KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, and Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited, the complaint documents by FedEx delivery to their addresses of record in Hong Kong. (See Teglia Decl. ¶¶ 5-7.) FedEx records show the package was delivered to the companies on November 24, 2017. (Id.) Cazes created KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, and Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited as nominee companies to hold his property and avoid law enforcement detection, including a condo in Cyprus, vacation property in Phuket, Thailand, and new [*25]  house under construction in Bangkok, Thailand. (See Am. Compl. ¶ 40; Doc. 53-1, Declaration of Jennifer Sanchez in Support of Ex Parte Motion for Default Judgment and Final Judgment of Forfeiture ("Sanchez Decl.") ¶¶ 4, 6.)

4. On December 19, 2017, Antiguan law enforcement personally served Nonsuch Management Limited, c/o Manager Cameron Fraser, with the complaint documents at Nonsuch Bay Resort, Nonsuch Bay, St. Phillips, Antigua and Barbuda. (Teglia Decl. ¶ 8.) Nonsuch Management Limited is the affiliated developer and property manager of the defendant Antiguan condominium purchased by Cazes for $400,000 using funds from his Bangkok Bank account in Thailand. (Sanchez Decl. ¶ 5.)

5. On December 21, 2017, Thai law enforcement personally served Cazes' wife, Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes), in her personal capacity and as Executor of the Estate of Alexandre Cazes, with the complaint documents at her residence in Bangkok, Thailand. (Teglia Decl. ¶ 9-10.)

6. On January 22, 2018, the Government mailed Hatrox Limited, the complaint documents and Minute Order dated October 17, 2017, by FedEx delivery to its address in Cyprus. (Teglia Decl. ¶ 11.) FedEx records show the package was delivered to Hatrox [*26]  Limited on January 29, 2018. (Id.) Cazes created Hatrox Limited. to hold title to his $2 million condominium in Cyprus, which he purchased to qualify for the country's citizenship by investment program. (Sanchez Decl. ¶ 3.)

7. On January 31, 2018, law enforcement personally served Yaman Properties Co. Limited, with the complaint documents. (Teglia Decl. ¶ 12.) Cazes created Yaman Properties Co. Limited to hold title to his home being built in the Granada Pinklao-Phetkasem housing estate in Bangkok, Thailand, which he purchased for several million dollars in cash. (Sanchez Decl. ¶¶ 6-7)

The Government also worked with the governments of Thailand, Antigua, and Cyprus to post copies of the Notice of Verified Complaint for Forfeiture In Rem on the real properties purchased by Cazes in each of those respective countries, as follows:

1. On December 19, 2017, notice of this action was posted at #302 Nonsuch Bay Condominiums (C-200080017, LOT #9) in St. Phillips South, Antigua. (Doc. 27.)

2. On December 21, 2017, notice of this action was posted at 514 and 522 Soi 28 off Phutta Monthon Sai 3 in Bangkok, Thailand. (Docs. 24-25.)

3. On January 19, 2018, notice of this action was posted at 1399/8 [*27]  Granada Pin Klao-Phet Kasem Housing Estate, Kanchana Phisk Road, Khwaeng Bang Khae Nua Road Khwaeng Sala Thammasop in Bangkok, Thailand. (Doc. 37.)

4. On January 22, 2018, notice of this action was posted at Villa Torcello, 28/18 Moo 6, Kamala, Kathu in Phuket, Thailand. (Doc. 38.)

5. On March 1, 2018, notice of this action was posted at Villa 1 at the Sea Pearl Residences in Paralimni Famagusta, Cyprus. (Doc. 41.)

Accordingly, Notices of Verified Complaint for Forfeiture In Rem have been posted on each of the six real properties identified in the Amended Verified Complaint as required by 18 U.S.C. § 985. (Docs. 24-25, 27, 37-38, 41.)
Additionally, the Government executed arrest warrants in rem for the defendant cryptocurrency in the government's control, the bank account in Liechtenstein, and eleven bank accounts in Thailand. (See Docs. 11, 21, 43.) The Government also executed arrest warrants in rem for the defendant cryptocurrency from AlphaBay's servers as well as the defendant vehicles being stored in Thailand, which include a 2013 Lamborghini Aventador, a Porsche Panamera, a Mini Cooper, and a BMW motorcycle. (See Docs. 46, 52.)

On November 14, 2017, the Clerk of Court entered default against Cazes' [*28]  parents, Martin Cazes and Danielle Heroux. (Docs. 18-19.) On January 11, 2018, the Clerk of Court entered default against Ace Guide Holding, Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited, and KGYJ Management Limited. (Doc. 29.) On January 31, 2018, the Clerk of Court entered default against Cazes' wife Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes), Nonsuch Management Limited, and the Estate of Alexandre Cazes. (Docs. 34-36.) On March 2, 2018, the Clerk of Court entered default against Hatrox Limited (Doc. 42) and on March 23, 2018, the Clerk of Court entered default against Yaman Properties Co. Limited (Doc. 48). Thus, the Clerk of the Court has entered default against all the Known Claimants. The Government filed the present Ex Parte Motion for Default Judgment and Final Judgment of Forfeiture on June 1, 2018. (Doc. 54.) No opposition has been filed to the Government's Motion.



IV. DISCUSSION

A. Legal Standard
The Government seeks judgment against the interests of the Known Claimants, and also seeks final judgment of forfeiture against all other unknown potential claimants. The Supplemental Rules themselves do not provide a procedure to seek default judgment in an action in rem. However, Supplemental Rule A provides: "The Federal Rules [*29]  of Civil Procedure also apply to the foregoing proceedings except to the extent that they are inconsistent with these Supplemental Rules."

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 55(b)(2) provides that a court has discretion to enter default judgment against a party and provides as follows:

(2) By the Court. In all other cases, the party must apply to the court for a default judgment. A default judgment may be entered against a minor or incompetent person only if represented by a general guardian, conservator, or other like fiduciary who has appeared. If the party against whom a default judgment is sought has appeared personally or by a representative, that party or its representative must be served with written notice of the application at least 7 days before the hearing. The court may conduct hearings or make referrals—preserving any federal statutory right to a jury trial—when, to enter or effectuate judgment, it needs to: (A) conduct an accounting; (B) determine the amount of damages; (C) establish the truth of any allegation by evidence; or (D) investigate any other matter.

In considering whether to enter default judgment, courts consider the following factors: (1) the possibility of prejudice to the plaintiff; (2) the merits [*30]  of plaintiff's substantive claim; (3) the sufficiency of the compliant; (4) the sum of money at stake in the action; (5) the possibility of a dispute concerning material facts; (6) whether the default was due to excusable neglect; and (7) the strong policy of favoring decision on the merits. Eitel v. McCool, 782 F.2d 1470, 1471-72 (9th Cir. 1986). Upon default, the well-pleaded allegations of the complaint relating to liability are taken as true. TeleVideo Systems, Inc. v. Heidenthal, 826 F.2d 915, 917-18 (9th Cir. 1987); United States v. Approximately $30,000.00 in U.S. Currency, No. 1:13-cv-1542 GSA, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114771, 2015 WL 5097707, at *5 (E.D. Cal. Aug. 28, 2015). Accord Dundee Cement Co. v. Highway Pipe & Concrete Products, Inc., 722 F.2d 1319, 1323 (7th Cir. 1983).
In the context of an in rem forfeiture action, a court considering default judgment should also consider the procedural requirements set forth by the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act of 2000, 18 U.S.C. § 983; the Supplemental Rules; and the Court's Local Rules for Admiralty and in rem actions. See United States v. $191,910.00, 16 F.3d 1051, 1069 (9th Cir. 1994) (explaining that, because civil forfeiture is a "harsh and oppressive procedure which is not favored by the courts," the Government carries the burden of demonstrating its strict adherence to procedural rules), superseded by statute on other grounds.



B. Procedural Requirements

1. Sufficiency of the Complaint
Pursuant to the Supplemental Rules, the Government must file a verified [*31]  complaint that (1) states the grounds for jurisdiction and venue, (2) describes the property being forfeited including the location of tangible property, (3) identifies the statute under which the forfeiture action is brought, and (4) includes sufficient factual detail to support a reasonable belief that the Government will be able to meet its burden of proof at trial. See Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(2). Though the sufficiency of the factual detail of the verified complaint is a higher standard than "notice pleading," it is still a "low bar." United States v. Aguilar, 782 F.3d 1101, 1109 (9th Cir. 2015). With respect to drug crimes, the Government is not required to show a direct relationship between the proceeds of a drug crime and a specific drug transaction. Rather, circumstantial evidence may support the forfeiture of the proceeds of a drug crime. See United States v. $30,670.00, 403 F.3d 448, 467-70 (7th Cir. 2005) (concluding that the totality of the circumstances demonstrated that an airline passenger's cash hoard was connected to drug trafficking and subject to forfeiture); United States v. $242,484.00, 389 F.3d 1149, 1160 (11th Cir. 2004) (applying totality of the circumstances to determine that cash carried by airline passenger was the proceeds of, or traceable to, an illegal drug transaction); Approximately $30,000.00 in U.S. Currency, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114771, 2015 WL 5097707, at *6.

Here, the Government filed a verified a complaint and identified the bases for jurisdiction [*32]  as 28 U.S.C. § 1355(a), (b)(1), (b)(2) and 18 U.S.C. § 981. (Am. Compl. ¶ 2.) The verified amended complaint further states that venue is proper pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1355(b)(2) and 1395(a), and 18 U.S.C. § 981(h) because law enforcement agents made multiple undercover purchases of controlled substances, fake identification documents, and other illegal items from AlphaBay vendors, including purchases made from, and illegal items shipped to, the Eastern District of California. (Id. ¶ 3.)

Next, the amended verified complaint describes the Defendant Assets being forfeited with particularity including the location of the vehicles and real property included in the Defendant Assets. (Id. ¶ 1.) The amended verified complaint also states that the Defendant Assets are subject to forfeiture to the United States pursuant to three statutory provisions: 18 U.S.C. §§ 981(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C), and 21 U.S.C. § 881(a)(6). (Id. ¶¶ 46-59; see also Doc. 53 at 19.) First, under 18 U.S.C. § 981(a)(1)(A), property subject to forfeiture includes "[a]ny property, real or personal, involved in a transaction in violation of section 1956, 1957 or 1960 of [Title 18], or any property traceable to such property." Title 18 U.S.C. § 1956(a)(1), commonly known as the money laundering statute, makes it a crime to knowingly conduct, or attempt to conduct, a financial transaction involving the proceeds of "specified unlawful activity," [*33]  either with the intent to promote the carrying on of the unlawful activity, or knowing that the transaction is designed to conceal the nature of the proceeds of the unlawful activity. For purposes of 18 U.S.C. § 1956, "specified unlawful activity" includes, among other things, violations of federal drug laws, including 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), which makes it a crime to "manufacture, distribute, or dispense, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, a controlled substance." See 18 U.S.C. § 1956(c)(7)(C). Title 18 U.S.C. § 1956(h) further provides that any person who conspires to commit any crime under 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956 or 1957 is subject to the same penalties as the underlying crime that was the object of the conspiracy.

Second, under 18 U.S.C. § 981(a)(1)(C), property subject to forfeiture also includes "[a]ny property, real or personal, which constitutes or is derived from proceeds traceable to a violation of . . . any offense constituting 'specified unlawful activity' (as defined in section 1956(c)(7) of this title), or a conspiracy to commit such offense." The term "specified unlawful activity" includes "racketeering activity" as defined by 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1), which in turn, includes violations of 18 U.S.C. § 1028 (fraud in connection with identification documents), 18 U.S.C. § 1029 (fraud in connection with access devices), and 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957 (money laundering); [*34]  and 21 U.S.C. §§ 841, 843, and 846 (drug trafficking, use of a communication facility, and conspiracy). 18 U.S.C. § 1956(c)(7)(A).

Third, under 21 U.S.C. § 881(a)(6), property subject to forfeiture to the United States includes:

All moneys, negotiable instruments, securities, or other things of value furnished or intended to be furnished by any person in exchange for a controlled substance or listed chemical in violation of this subchapter, all proceeds traceable to such an exchange, and all moneys, negotiable instruments, and securities used or intended to be used to facilitate any violation of this subchapter.

With respect to the requirement that the complaint include sufficient factual detail to support a reasonable belief that the Government will be able to meet its burden of proof at trial, the Court finds the allegations in the Government's amended verified complaint provide sufficient evidence to reasonably believe that the Defendant Assets were involved in a transaction in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957 or 1960, or are traceable to property involved in such a transaction; derived from proceeds traceable to a violation of an offense constituting 'specified unlawful activity' under 18 U.S.C. § 1956(c)(7), or a conspiracy to commit such an offense; and/or constitute "moneys" furnished or [*35]  intended to be furnished in exchange for a controlled substance or was used or intended to be used to facilitate one or more violations of 21 U.S.C. § 841, et seq. Specifically, the Government alleges that Cazes founded and operated AlphaBay, the world's largest dark web marketplace for illegal goods and services, and knowingly assisted the buyers and sellers on the marketplace conceal the nature of these illegal transactions. (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 4-6, 11.)
AlphaBay charged a commission for every transaction conducted by its users, which included sales of malware, controlled substances, chemicals, guns, stolen financial information, and counterfeit documents, among other illegal goods and services. (Id. ¶¶ 4, 13.) Federal agents traced Bitcoin transactions originating with AlphaBay to digital currency accounts, and ultimately bank accounts and other tangible assets held by Cazes and his wife. (Id. ¶ 31.) According to the Government, Cazes concealed and disguised the illicit source of the funds by commingling the criminal proceeds in digital currency exchange accounts and bank accounts controlled by Cazes and his wife, and using an automated mixing and tumbling procedure designed to conceal the source of the criminal [*36]  funds when converting Bitcoin (and other cryptocurrencies) to currency. (Id.)

At the time of Cazes' arrest, his laptop was logged into the server that hosted the AlphaBay website and law enforcement personnel identified several passwords/passkeys for the AlphaBay website, all the AlphaBay servers, and other online identities associated with AlphaBay. (Id. ¶ 33-34.) As a result of the password discovery, law enforcement identified all the information on the AlphaBay servers, including the cryptocurrency wallets contained on each server. (Id. ¶ 34, 41.) Law enforcement personnel also discovered a document that identified the value and location of Cazes' assets obtained from AlphaBay's revenues including the vehicles, real properties, bank accounts, and cryptocurrency holdings that are included in the Defendant Assets. (Id. ¶¶ 35-40.) "In the absence of assertion of interests in the Defendant [Assets], the Court will not question the facts supporting [their] forfeiture[.]" Approximately $30,000.00 in U.S. Currency, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114771, 2015 WL 5097707, at *6. The Court therefore finds that the facts, as alleged, provide a sufficient connection between the Defendant Assets and illegal money laundering, racketeering, fraud, and drug activity, to support a forfeiture. [*37] 



2. Notice by Publication
Subject to certain exceptions not present here, the Supplemental Rules require the Government to publish notice of the forfeiture in a manner that is reasonably calculated to notify potential claimants of the action. Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(a)(iv). The content of the notice must describe the property with reasonable particularity, state the times to file a claim and to answer the complaint, and identify the name of the Government attorney to be served with the claim and answer. Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(a)(ii)(A)-(C). This notice requirement may be satisfied by posting a notice on an official internet government forfeiture site for at least thirty consecutive days. Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(a)(iv)(C).

Here, publication occurred on the official internet government forfeiture site (www.forfeiture.gov) for thirty consecutive days. (Doc. 13.) The Government filed a Declaration of Publication stating that notice had been created and published on the forfeiture website for 30 days, beginning on September 27, 2017. (Id.) A copy of the notice was attached to the Declaration of Publication, which described the property with reasonable particularity including the locations of the real properties, license plate numbers and locations of the vehicles, account numbers and names [*38]  on the bank accounts, and virtual addresses of the cryptocurrency, making up the Defendant Assets. (Doc. 13, Attach. 1.) The notice clearly stated the time requirements to file a claim and an answer. (Id.) Further, the notice provided the name of the attorney to be served with any claim and answer. (Id.) Thus, the Supplemental Rule's notice-content requirements have been satisfied. Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(a)(ii)(A)-(C). Additionally, the notice was published for thirty consecutive days from September 27, 2017, through October 26, 2017, on the forfeiture website, which satisfies the Supplemental Rule's notice requirements with regard to frequency and means. (Doc. 13, Attach. 2.)



3. Personal Notice
When the Government knows the identity of the property owner, the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment requires "the Government to make a greater effort to give him notice than otherwise would be mandated." United States v. Real Property, 135 F.3d 1312, 1315 (9th Cir. 1998). In such cases, the Government must attempt to provide notice by means reasonably calculated under all circumstances to apprise the owner of the pendency of the forfeiture action. Dusenbery v. United States, 534 U.S. 161, 168, 122 S. Ct. 694, 151 L. Ed. 2d 597 (2002); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(b). "Reasonable notice, however, requires only that the [G]overnment attempt to provide actual notice; it does not require that the [G]overnment demonstrate that it was successful [*39]  in providing actual notice." Mesa Valderrama v. United States 417 F.3d 1189, 1197 (11th Cir. 2005); Real Property, 135 F.3d at 1316.

The Supplemental Rules indicate that the Government must send notice of the forfeiture action "to any person who reasonably appears to be a potential claimant on the facts known to the government." Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. R. G(4)(b)(i). The notice must include the following information: the date when the notice is sent; a deadline for filing a claim that is at least thirty-five days after the notice is sent; that an answer or a motion under Rule 12 must be filed no later than twenty-one days after filing the claim; and the name of the government attorney to be served with the claim and answer. Id. Here, the Government provided notice of the forfeiture action by mailing copies of the required documentation via FedEx delivery to Martin Cazes, Danielle Heroux, KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited, and Hatrox Limited. (See Docs. 17, 28.) Additionally, the Government personally served court documents on Nonsuch Management Limited on December 19, 2017; Cazes' wife Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes) and the Estate of Alexandre Cazes on December 21, 2017; and Yaman Properties Co. Limited on January 31, 2018. (Docs. 32-33, 47.) Therefore, reasonable attempts at serving notice [*40]  on the Known Claimants were made.



4. Notice Requirements Involving Real Property
In civil forfeiture cases involving real property, Congress has eliminated the need for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest in rem. 18 U.S.C. § 985(c)(3) ("If real property has been posted in accordance with this subsection, it shall not be necessary for the court to issue an arrest warrant in rem, or to take any other action to establish in rem jurisdiction over the property.") Instead, the United States may initiate a forfeiture action against real property by "posting a notice of the complaint on the property[.]" 18 U.S.C. § 985(c)(1)(B). Here, the Government posted copies of the Notice of Verified Complaint for Forfeiture In Rem on the real properties purchased by Cazes in Antigua, Thailand, and Cyprus. (Docs. 24-25, 27, 37-38, 41.) Accordingly, the Government provided proper notice of forfeiture of the real properties included in the Defendant Assets.



5. The Time to File a Claim or an Answer
Pursuant to the Supplemental Rules, any person who asserts an interest in or a right in a forfeiture action must file a claim with the Court within the time specified by the direct notice. Fed. R. Civ. P. Supp. G(4)(b)(ii)(B), (5)(a)(ii)(A). Failure [*41]  to comply with the procedural requirements for opposing the forfeiture precludes a person from establishing standing in the forfeiture proceeding. Real Property, 135 F.3d at 1317.

Here, more than thirty days have passed since the completion of publication, and more than thirty-five days have passed since the date that the Known Claimants were provided direct notice of the Government's complaint in this action. Accordingly, the time to file a claim has expired, and pursuant to Rule 55(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Clerk of the Court properly entered defaults against Martin Cazes and Danielle Heroux on November 14, 2017; KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, and Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited on January 11, 2018; Nonsuch Management Limited, Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes), and the Estate of Alexandre Cazes on January 31, 2018; Hatrox Limited on March 2, 2018; and Yaman Properties Co. Limited on March 23, 2018. (Docs. 18-19, 29, 34-36, 42, 48.)



6. Conclusion
The Court finds that the Government has met the procedural requirements applicable to civil in rem forfeiture actions as set forth in 18 U.S.C. §§ 983 and 985, the Supplemental Rules, and the Local Rules for the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. This favors the entry of default judgment [*42]  and the issuance of a final judgment in forfeiture to vest in the United States all right, title, and interest in the Defendant Assets.



C. Discretionary Eitel Factors
Beyond satisfaction of the procedural requirements, the discretionary Eitel factors outlined by the Ninth Circuit also favor granting the Government's Motion. First, the Government would be prejudiced by the denial of its Motion, having spent additional time and effort litigating an action, with no response from the Known Claimants. Second, as set forth above, the Government's claims appear to have merit. Third, as also set forth above, the Government has adhered to the procedural requirements of a forfeiture action in rem, including the filing of a sufficient complaint. Fourth, although the Defendant Assets subject to forfeiture are of a substantial value, this alone does not warrant denial of the Government's Motion. Fifth, there are no genuine disputed issues of material fact. Sixth, it does not appear that the failure of any other claimant to answer is due to excusable neglect. Finally, although merits-based decisions are always preferred, it is not practical where no claimant has appeared in the action, and this factor [*43]  is outweighed by the remainder of the Eitel factors. Accordingly, there is no impediment to default judgment sought by the Government and the Court will recommend that the Motion be granted.



V. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
For the reasons discussed above, this Court RECOMMENDS that:

1. The Government's Ex Parte Motion for Default Judgment against the interests of Martin Cazes, Danielle Heroux, KGYJ Management Limited, Ace Guide Holding, Brilliant Landmark Concept Limited, Nonsuch Management Limited, Sunisa Thapsuwan (Cazes), The Estate of Alexandre Cazes, Hatrox Limited, and Yaman Properties Co. Limited, in the Defendant Assets (Doc. 53) be GRANTED;

2. The Clerk of the Court enter a final judgment of forfeiture pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 981(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C), and 21 U.S.C. § 881(a)(6), forfeiting all right, title, and interest in the Defendant Assets to the United States to be disposed of according to law and the authorities and laws of Thailand, Cyprus, Liechtenstein, and Antigua and Barbuda; and

3. Within fourteen (14) days of service of an order adopting these findings and recommendations, the Government shall submit a proposed final judgment of forfeiture consistent with the findings and recommendations and order adopting them.

These [*44]  Findings and Recommendations are submitted to the district judge assigned to this action, pursuant to Title 28 of the United States Code § 636(b)(1)(B). Within fourteen (14) days of service of this recommendation, any party may file written objections to these findings and recommendations with the Court and serve a copy on all parties. Such a document should be captioned "Objections to Magistrate Judge's Findings and Recommendations." The district judge will review the magistrate judge's Findings and Recommendations pursuant to Title 28 of the United States Code section 636(b)(1)(C). The parties are advised that failure to file objections within the specified time may waive the right to appeal the district judge's order. Wilkerson v. Wheeler, 772 F. 3d 834, 839 (9th Cir. 2014) (citing Baxter v. Sullivan, 923 F. 2d 1391, 1394 (9th Cir. 1991)); Martinez v. Ylst, 951 F.2d 1153 (9th Cir. 1991). BACKGROUND
In October 2014, Defendant Ryan Leigh Harsha pleaded guilty to one count of fraud in connection with identification documents in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1028(a). On October 29, 2014, this Court sentenced the Defendant to six months' imprisonment and three years' supervised release, a sentence which this Court found to be at the low end of the Defendant's guidelines range. Judgment [Dkt. 20], at 2-5 (Dec. 29, 2014); Statement of Reasons [Dkt. 21], at 1 (Dec. 29, 2014).

Defendant's supervised release began on February [*2]  19, 2015. Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 1 (June 24, 2015). He first reported to the United States Probation Office for the District of Columbia on February 27, 2015, where he met with Senior Probation Officer Damaris Rodriguez-Feleke for initial intake. This was the only time he reported in person to the Probation Office. Thereafter, he was supervised by United States Probation Officer Chase Solarin.

As will be seen, Defendant's supervision was largely unsuccessful. Four months after it began, Officer Solarin filed a probation petition on June 24, 2015 alleging that Defendant (1) had left the judicial district without the permission of either the Court or his probation officer, (2) had failed to notify his probation officer ten days in advance of his having obtained new employment, and (3) had failed to report to his probation officer in the manner and frequency directed by the officer. Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 1-2 (June 24, 2015). Later that same month a supervised release violation warrant was issued by this Court for Defendant's arrest. During the more than two years it took to execute the warrant, Defendant had no meaningful contact with his probation officer. Supervised Release Warrant [Dkt. 23] (Aug. 18, 2017).

In July of this year, two [*3]  bail bondsmen attempted to apprehend Defendant on the warrant at his home in Maryland. Probation Petition [Dkt. 25], at 2 (Aug. 31, 2017). According to the bail bondsmen, when confronted, Defendant denied that he was the same Ryan Leigh Harsha that was the subject of the warrant. Id. Defendant stated several times that he was not Harsha and that he was innocent. Id. He produced a Quebec identification card that had his name listed as Ryan Leigh. Id. He then fled into his home and locked the door. Id. The bail bondsman then entered Defendant's home through a rear door and apprehended him. Id. The Sykesville Police were called to the scene. Id. Through the Maryland Vehicle Administration, the Sykesville Police were able to identify Defendant as Ryan Leigh Harsha with various outstanding warrants, including the supervised release warrant issued by this Court. Id. The Sykesville Police charged Defendant with False Statement to a Peace Officer and Resist/Interfere Arrest. Id.

As a result of his arrest, the Probation Office filed a second Probation Petition on August 31, 2017 alleging his arrest as a fourth violation of the conditions of his supervised release. Id. After Defendant was released on bail in the Sykesville matter, he first [*4]  appeared before the undersigned on August 22, 2017. Through counsel, Defendant sought his release pending resolution of the supervised release violation petition. That request was denied because of the length of time Defendant's arrest warrant was outstanding, because of the nature of his alleged probation violations, and because of the circumstances of his arrest in Sykesville, Maryland.1Link to the text of the note See Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1(a)(6) (in determining whether to detain a releasee during revocation proceedings, the burden is on the releasee to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that he or she will not flee or pose a danger to any other person or the community).

A preliminary hearing on revocation of Defendant's supervised release was held on August 22 and 31, 2017. During the hearing, the government represented that, in lieu of trailing Defendant's Sykesville arrest until its resolution, the government would not rely on the alleged arrest as a basis for revocation of his supervised release.2Link to the text of the note Because Defendant contested each of the three remaining alleged violations of supervised release, the undersigned allowed both sides to submit evidence concerning the factual issues underlying each violation. The government offered [*5]  the testimony of Probation Officer Solarin and Senior Probation Officer Rodriguez-Feleke. Defendant offered his own testimony, as well as six exhibits, including: (1) emails exchanged between himself and Officer Solarin—four in the period between February and June 2015, and one in February 2016; and (2) bank statements and financial records showing that Defendant is presently earning income day trading cryptocurrency (i.e., bitcoins, etc.).

The Court's findings based on the evidence submitted by the parties at the preliminary revocation hearing follow.



FINDINGS OF FACT
Revocation of supervised release requires the government to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the releasee has violated one or more of the conditions of his or her supervised release. 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(3). Based on evidence presented at the hearing, the undersigned finds that the government has met its burden concerning all three alleged violations at issue, each of which will be addressed in turn below.



Violation 1: Leaving the District Without Permission of Probation Officer
The Probation Office first alleges that Defendant left the judicial district without permission of his probation officer in May and June of 2015. Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 1 (June 24, [*6]  2015). It is undisputed that Defendant left the judicial district at that time to attend training in Florida to become a day trader of cryptocurrency. The issue is whether Defendant obtained the permission of Officer Solarin to do so. At the hearing, Officer Solarin testified that he never gave Defendant permission to leave the judicial district prior to him leaving. Officer Solarin stated that he first learned that Defendant was in Florida from Defendant's counsel who called him after Defendant had traveled to Florida.

Defendant admitted during his testimony that he made several trips in May and June 2015 to Florida without informing Officer Solarin. Defendant claims, however, that he had earlier communications with Officer Solarin where he disclosed that he planned to go Florida for training and that Officer Solarin never specifically directed him not to go. Although Defendant admits he never had Officer Solarin's express permission to travel outside the judicial district, he interpreted Officer Solarin's alleged silence as "tacit permission" that he could travel to Florida.

Defendant claimed during his testimony that he had an email to substantiate that he disclosed to Officer Solarin [*7]  his plan to travel to Florida. That email was not produced during the hearing. In one email that was admitted into evidence, Defendant states to Officer Solarin that he was unable to report for supervision because he was "still in training." Def. Ex. 3. The email does not say that the training was in Florida.

Even were the undersigned to credit Defendant's testimony concerning his alleged conversations with Officer Solarin about his planned travel to Florida, it would not provide a basis for finding that Defendant in fact complied with the conditions of his supervised release. Fairly read, and considering the court-ordered supervisory relationship at issue, those conditions require the actual, not "tacit," permission of a releasee's probation officer prior to a releasee leaving the judicial district. In any event, Defendant admitted during his testimony that he made several trips to Florida without informing Officer Solarin of those individual trips. Accordingly, the Court finds that the government has established the first violation by a preponderance of the evidence.



Violation 2: Changing Employment Without Ten Day Notification of Probation Officer
The Probation Office next alleges [*8]  that Defendant failed to notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in his employment. Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 2 (June 24, 2015). Again, it is not disputed that Defendant's travel to Florida was for purposes of training for new employment, and that he thereafter became a day trader of cryptocurrency. The issue is whether Defendant notified Officer Solarin ten days prior to that change of employment status. Defendant, in his testimony, did not assert that he did so. He admitted that he had a conversation with Officer Solarin about the training, and that Officer Solarin reminded him of his obligation to provide notification of any change in his employment status ten days in advance. Officer Solarin testified that he never received notification from Defendant that he had obtained new employment. No contemporaneous documents admitted into evidence show otherwise. Indeed, in one email where Defendant acknowledges that he was "still in training," Officer Solarin responds by telling Defendant: "Pursuant to your conditions of supervised release, you are [to] notify your probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence [or] employment. I was not made aware of any changes [*9]  in your employment status." Def. Ex. 3 (emphasis in original). Defendant submitted no subsequent email to convert that statement, nor did his testimony address it. Accordingly, the Court finds that the government has established the second violation by a preponderance of the evidence.



Violation 3: Failure to Report to Probation Officer in the Manner Directed
The third violation alleges that Defendant failed to report to his probation officer in the manner and frequency directed by the Court or his probation officer. Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 2 (June 24, 2015). Specifically, Officer Solarin states in the petition that:

[f]rom May 19, 2015 to June 11, 2015, multiple unsuccessful attempts were made to schedule Mr. Harsha for an office visit or to speak with him over the phone. Mr. Harsha communicated with this officer via email, and advised that he cannot use his phone during business hours because he is in training. Mr. Harsha was directed several times to call this officer after hours; however, he only called once (June 10 2015). On June 11, 2015, this officer gave Mr. Harsha a final instruction to call this officer on the same date any time after 9:00p.m. Mr. Harsha was told to call every thirty minutes until he speaks [*10]  to the probation officer. The undersigned provided Mr. Harsha his (this officer) private and government-issued cell phone numbers. Mr. Harsha did not call.

Id.
Defendant testified that, immediately following his release from incarceration in early 2015, Officer Solarin directed him to report by calling a cellular telephone number between the first and fifth of each month. Defendant averred that he followed that direction every month, each time leaving a number at which he could be reached. He stated that Officer Solarin only returned these calls twice, and on one of those occasions Defendant failed to answer.

Defendant's testimony largely misses the thrust of the allegation in the Probation Petition. The emails submitted at the hearing show that, whatever Officer Solarin may have told Defendant at the beginning of his supervision about how he could report, Officer Solarin changed Defendant's reporting requirement—as Officer Solarin was authorized to do—presumably because the original reporting arrangement was not working. In the earliest email submitted as part of the record, Officer Solarin wrote to Defendant:

On May 22, 2015, you did not appear for a scheduled office visit. You did not [*11]  make any attempts to contact this officer to re-schedule. This is formal notification that you are currently in violation status. Further violations may result in a warrant being issued for your arrest to appear before the Court.

Def. Ex. 4. Defendant responded by admitting that he had failed to report as instructed, but contested the change in his reporting requirement directed by Officer Solarin, writing in an email four days later:
Chase[,] how is it that we had a visited scheduled? You sent a email DEMANDING me to be at your office with in 24 hours. I was told by you to CALL between the 1st and the 5th of the month. I have done that. . . . I am in training and don't have access to my phone.

Id. (emphasis original).
On May 27, 2015, Officer Solarin again directed Defendant to report in person two days later, adding "[i]f you do not show up for this appointment or contact me, I will record this as your second failure to report for a scheduled appointment." Def. Ex. 3. Again, Defendant did not report in person as directed. Rather, he responded the same day, "I will be still in training as I have said SEVERAL times. I can't make it." Id. (emphasis in original).

On May 28, 2015, Officer Solarin [*12]  wrote:

I am giving you another directive to call me before the end of the business day. If you cannot call before the end of the business day given your training, we can schedule a time for you to call me after hours. If you do not do so, I will record this as a failure to follow the instructions of the probation officer.

Id. According to the Probation Petition, Defendant did not make the call as instructed on May 28. See Probation Petition [Dkt. 22], at 2 (June 24, 2015) ("Mr. Harsha was directed several times to call this officer after hours; however, he only called once (June 10, 2015)."). The next email in the record to Defendant from Officer Solarin is dated June 11, 2015. It states:
I missed your phone call on Tuesday at 9:00pm. I am giving you another instruction to call me tonight anytime after 9:30pm. If I do not answer, you are to call me every 30 minutes tonight until you speak to me. If I do not speak to you tonight, I will take additional action.

Def. Ex. 1 (emphasis in original). Again, according to the Probation Petition, Defendant did not call as instructed on June 11.
Defendant produced no evidence at the hearing contradicting what these contemporaneous emails show: that he repeatedly failed to report as [*13]  directed by his probation officer. Accordingly, the Court finds that the government has established the third violation by a preponderance of the evidence.



ALTERNATIVES AVAILABLE TO THE COURT
The violations alleged are considered Grade C violations under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. U.S.S.G. § 7B1.1(a)(3). Upon a finding of a Grade C violation, the Court may (1) revoke supervised release or (2) extend the term of supervised release and/or modify the conditions of supervision. Id. § 7B1.3(a)(2). The statutory maximum term of imprisonment upon revocation of supervised release for Defendant's underlying Class C felony is twenty-four months. 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(3). Based on Defendant's Criminal History category of I, the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines recommend a period of incarceration of three to nine months should his supervision be revoked. See U.S.S.G. §§ 7B1.4(a), 4B1.1. The Guidelines are, of course, precatory.

When supervised release is revoked and a term of imprisonment imposed, any term of supervised release following that imprisonment must be reduced by the term of imprisonment imposed following revocation. 18 U.S.C. § 3583(h). The maximum term of supervised release for the underlying Class C felony is thirty-six months. Id. § 3583(b)(1).



RECOMMENDATION
Both the Probation Office and the government recommend [*14]  that, based on the above violations, Defendant's supervised release should be revoked and he be incarcerated at the high end of the guidelines range, i.e., 9 months. Because they believe that Defendant has demonstrated that he is not amenable to supervision, they further recommend that no period of supervised release should be imposed following Defendant's incarceration. For his part, Defendant contests each of the violations and requests that his supervised release not be revoked and that he not be re-incarcerated.

The undersigned agrees with the Probation Office and the government's recommendation that Defendant's supervised release should be revoked at this time. Defendant has demonstrated that he is not amenable to supervision. Taken together, the violations proven by the government tell a story of a releasee who repeatedly refused to comply with some of the least onerous conditions of his release. Since the bench warrant was issued over two years ago, Defendant has effectively been under no supervision at all, which was likely what Defendant hoped to accomplished by failing to make himself available for supervision in May and June of 2015. The undersigned sees no reason to expend [*15]  further resources of the Probation Office on Defendant, and believes it is unlikely that imposing harsher conditions would prove more conducive to his rehabilitation. For the same reason, the undersigned agrees with the Probation Office and government that Defendant should not be placed again on supervised release following any period of incarceration.

The undersigned disagrees, however, with the government and Probation Office's recommendation as to the period of incarceration Defendant should serve at this time. Both recommend a sentence at the high end of the guidelines range. That would be excessive given the Defendant's underlying criminal conduct and the nature of the violations the government elected to pursue in these proceedings. Further, to his credit, Defendant has taken steps to build a life for himself: he now appears to have a stable home with his wife and step daughter, and has apparently found a source of income. Accordingly, the undersigned recommends that Defendant be incarcerated at the low end of the guidelines range with credit for time served3Link to the text of the note followed by no period of supervised release.

* * * *

The parties are hereby advised that under the provisions of Local Criminal Rules 59.2(a)(2) and 59.2(b) of [*16]  the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, any party who objects to the Report and Recommendation must file a written objection thereto with the Clerk of this Court within 14 days of the party's receipt of this Report and Recommendation. The written objections must specifically identify the portion of the report and/or recommendation to which objection is made and the basis for such objections. The parties are further advised that failure to file timely objections to the findings and recommendations set forth in this report may waive their right of appeal from an order of the District Court that adopts such findings and recommendation. See Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985).

Digitally signed by

G. Michael Harvey

Date: 2017.09.08

15:31:50-04'00'

Date: September 8, 2017

/s/ G. Michael Harvey

G. MICHAEL HARVEY

UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
For his a part, Defendant claims that he had no knowledge of the federal warrant for his arrest and that he fled from the bail bondsmen in Sykesville because he did not know why they were accosting him. He asserted through counsel that he had an identification card with only his first and middle name on it because "that was the name he was using." No explanation was given for his possession of a Quebec identification card when he resides in Sykesville, Maryland.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
In the event this Court were not to revoke Defendant's supervised release, the government may asserted that it may press his allegedcriminal conduct in Sykesville as an additional violation of his supervised release were he to be convicted.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant has been held in this matter since August 18, 2017. I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Niko Vuori brings this action alleging breach of contract and misappropriation of likeness claims against Defendants Grasshopper Capital LLC ("Grasshopper"), Ari Lewis, and Sagar Rambhia. Defendants move to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(2), asserting that they do not have sufficient minimum contacts with California. Defendants also move for dismissal in accordance with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(3), contending that venue is improper in this District. In the alternative, Defendants move to transfer venue to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1406(a). The Court held a hearing on February 16, 2018. For the reasons stated below, Defendants' Motion is DENIED. [*2] 1Link to the text of the note



II. BACKGROUND

A. Vuori's Complaint
Vuori alleges that he is a "successful entrepreneur and investor" who has garnered a "strong reputation in Silicon Valley and beyond for identifying and developing cutting-edge technologies." Complaint (dkt. 1) ¶¶ 6, 18. He has launched startup companies, worked as senior executive at Zynga, Inc., and currently serves as an advisor to startup companies in the Bay Area. Id. ¶¶ 15-17, 19. He resides in Piedmont, California. Id. ¶ 6. Vuori alleges that Lewis and Rambhia are cryptocurrency investors from Jericho, New York, and that they created Grasshopper to operate a cryptocurrency fund, namely Grasshopper Capital Fund I LP (the "Fund"), which was "seeded primarily with the profits from their own previous investments." Id. ¶¶ 25-26, 30-31. Adam Collins, Lewis's classmate at Case Western Reserve University, has also assisted with Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 30. Vuori alleges that Grasshopper is a limited liability company organized under the laws of Delaware with its principal place of business in Jericho, New York, and that Lewis and Rambhia are the company's "sole and controlling members." Id. ¶ 7. Vuori alleges that Lewis lives in Jericho, New York, and serves [*3]  as Managing Member of Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 8. He further alleges that "[i]n the course of his work for Grasshopper, Lewis traveled to San Francisco to seek advice from Vuori and solicit investments from persons residing in the district, trading on Vuori's name and reputation." Id. Rambhia lives in Cleveland, Ohio, where he is currently enrolled at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine and also serves as a Managing Member of Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 9, 29.

Vuori alleges that he met Lewis in April 2015 and that Lewis later wrote to Vuori on May 2, 2017, "with Rambhia copied, to reintroduce himself and explain that he and Rambhia had 'decided to go full-time and raise a digital currency fund.'" Id. ¶ 34 (quoting an email sent by Lewis to Vuori). Vuori alleges that Lewis indicated that he and Rambhia were interested in setting up an advisory group. Id. ¶ 38. According to Vuori, Lewis and Rambhia sought an advisor who is "'down to earth'" and trustworthy, and who could facilitate introductions to individual and institutional investors. Id. ¶¶ 39-40 (quoting correspondence). Vuori alleges that he and Lewis agreed during a May 15, 2017 phone call "on the previously discussed scope of [*4]  work, including Defendants' ability to advertise Vuori as an advisor in order to boost Defendants' credibility, access to Vuori's fundraising network, and Vuori's general advice on Fund operation and investments." Id. ¶ 42. With respect to compensation, Vuori alleges that: (1) Lewis "suggested that Vuori receive 5% of Grasshopper's carry"; (2) "Vuori countered by requesting 10% of the carry to serve as an advisor"; and (3) Lewis accepted Vuori's counterproposal of 10% of the carry in exchange for serving as an advisor. Id. ¶ 42 (quoting a conversation by phone).

Vuori alleges that he asked Lewis to "memorialize their agreement in an e-mail" because Lewis had previously informed Vuori that it would take "a number of weeks or months" to draw up formal paper work. Id. ¶ 42. According to Vuori, Lewis sent Grasshopper's transactional attorney, Bart Mallon, an email on May 16, 2017 to inform him that Vuori would be serving as an advisor for Grasshopper in exchange for 10% of the fund's carry. Id. ¶ 45. Lewis elaborated on the nature of Vuori's role as an advisor, indicating that Vuori "'is going to help [the Fund]' by 'evaluating macroeconomic trends in the cryptocurrency market'; '[h]elping [*5]  us make buy and sell decisions on tokens'; '[h]elping portfolio companies when we engage management teams'; '[w]hen we begin to expand, help[ing] us identify hiring needs'"; and by providing "'[e]motional support for the ups and downs of running a fund.'" Id. (quoting correspondence) (alterations in original). Earlier that same day, Lewis also replied to Vuori, stating that he had spoken with his attorney and that they were "good to go on the advisory deal." Id. ¶ 44 (quoting correspondence). Vuori also alleges that Rambhia sent an email on May 18, 2017 in which Rambhia confirmed the agreement discussed above. Id. ¶ 46.

Vuori alleges that he dedicated approximately twenty percent of his time following the agreement on May 15, 2017 through September 2017 on matters pertaining to Grasshopper. Id. ¶¶ 48-49. According to Vuori, had he not been devoting his time to Grasshopper as an advisor, he would have "dedicated his time and resources to new investments and ventures" in addition to his other commitments to serve as an advisor. Id. ¶ 49.

Vuori alleges that Defendants began using Vuori's name, likeness, and reputation to "bolster the credibility and prominence of the Fund." Id. ¶ 50. According [*6]  to Vuori, Lewis listed Vuori as an advisor to Grasshopper on AngelList, which is "the industry's leading startup funding website." Id. ¶ 51. Additionally, Defendants named Vuori as an advisor in their pitch deck and provided information about his prior work experience, including: (1) Vuori's work as a senior executive at Zynga; (2) Vuori's role as a founder of Rocket Games; and (3) the fact that Rocket Games was acquired for up to $170 million. Id. ¶ 52. Vuori further alleges that Lewis wrote to Vuori in an email that Vuori's work as an advisor was one of the "3 key stats that we think are key to the initial email pitch." Id. ¶ 53 (quoting correspondence). According to Vuori, Defendants "often made reference in their solicitation e-mails to Vuori's ongoing work as an advisor and Vuori's previous successes as an entrepreneur." Id. ¶ 54. To illustrate how this practice was "immediately effective," Vuori alleges that, after a "prominent CEO" declined to answer an initial e-mail from Lewis, the CEO "promptly replied" after a second email from Lewis noted that Vuori was serving as an advisor to Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 57.

Vuori also alleges that Vuori introduced Defendants to his network of potential [*7]  investors between May and September of 2017 and that at least one of those investors pledged to invest in the Fund. Id. ¶¶ 58-59. According to Vuori, Lewis sent Vuori an email, with Rambhia copied, in which Lewis sought to discuss matters pertaining to Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 60. One such topic was fundraising, as Lewis wrote that he "would like to discuss [Rambhia's] and my progress on raising money" as well as how to "plan to target [Vuori's] contacts." Id.

Vuori alleges that Defendants sought advice from Vuori concerning various operational aspects of Grasshopper and that Grasshopper thrived during the time period in which Vuori served as an advisor. Id. ¶¶ 65-74. According to Vuori, Defendants repeatedly sought his input and feedback, and Vuori "continued to fulfill his role as advisor" by "exchanging e-mails, making himself available for calls, helping to make available his network of potential investors" and by providing "input on Grasshopper's operation processes, such as bookkeeping, IT, and trading." Id. ¶ 70. During his time as an advisor, Vuori alleges that Grasshopper grew and "began to garner headlines." Id. ¶ 73. In terms of growth, Vuori alleges that "Defendants have raised [*8]  several million dollars in investments since May 15, 2017, when Vuori agreed to serve as an advisor to Defendants." Id. ¶ 77.

Vuori alleges that Defendants refused to reduce their May 15, 2017 agreement with Vuori to a formal written contract and that Defendants repudiated the terms of the agreement on October 13, 2017. Id. ¶ 84. Vuori alleges that Lewis initially told him on May 22, 2017 that he would get an estimate as to how long it would take for Defendants' transactional attorneys to finish drafting formal papers for their agreement. Id. ¶ 78. According to Vuori, Lewis copied Rambhia when he provided Vuori numerous documents for his signature on August 9, 2017. Id. ¶ 80. These documents included: (1) "a Side Letter indicating that Vuori would not be charged a management fee"; (2) "a Subscription Agreement"; (3) "a PPM/LPA"; and (4) "an Operating Agreement, which Lewis said 'indicates [Vuori has] a 10% economic right in the fund." Id. ¶ 80. Vuori further alleges that "the drafts supplied by Lewis and Rambhia contained additional provisions that previously had not been discussed." Id.

Vuori alleges that he retained independent legal counsel to review the documents that Lewis had provided [*9]  and that he worked with his independent legal counsel "consistently from August 21 through September 26 in an effort to formally document the May 15 agreement he had reached with Grasshopper." Id. ¶ 81. During this time, Vuori alleges that he "made sure to keep Lewis updated" and that "Lewis indicated that Vuori's review of the documents did not pose a problem." Id. ¶ 82. Vuori further alleges that he "sent Lewis a few questions and suggested edits to the relevant paperwork" on September 25, 2017. Id. ¶ 83. According to Vuori, none of the edits "related to the terms of the parties' May 15 agreement," namely, "that Vuori was to receive 10% of the Fund's carry in exchange for serving as an advisor." Id.

Vuori alleges that Lewis, copying Rambhia, responded to Vuori on October 3, 2017. Id. ¶ 84. According to Vuori, Lewis wrote that he and Rambhia were "no longer able to offer incentivized 'advisory roles,' as circumstance has changed since when [Lewis and Rambhia] initially approached [Vuori] in May." Id. Lewis continued by indicating that he, Rambhia, and Collins "would still love to have [Vuori] as a limited partner." Id. Vuori responded on October 6, 2017 that Grasshopper had "'reneged [*10]  on [its] agreement to make [Vuori] an advisor to the fund, with a 10% economic interest in the carry of the fund.'" Id. ¶ 85 (quoting correspondence). Vuori also wrote that "the parties 'had been operating under this agreement, based on the services [Vuori has] been providing to the fund, and the assurances [Lewis] has been making to [Vuori],' especially '[Lewis's] email of May 16, 2017 to [Rambhia and Mallon].'" Id. Vuori continued by writing that "'Grasshopper Capital has been highlighting in all its marketing materials and correspondence with prospective and existing investors that [Vuori is] in fact an advisor to Grasshopper Capital," as Vuori's name and likeness, and information about his prior work experience were "prominently featured in Grasshopper Capital materials." Id. Vuori demanded that Defendants honor their May 15, 2017 agreement with him. Id.

Vuori alleges that, in response to Vuori's October 3, 2017 email, Lewis and Vuori spoke via telephone at Lewis's suggestion on October 8, 2017. Id. ¶ 86. Vuori alleges that he "reiterated his demand that Lewis and Rambhia honor their agreement," and that "Lewis told Vuori that he would get back to him." Id. On October 12, 2017, [*11]  Vuori alleges that "Lewis wrote Vuori but did not address any of the points raised in Vuori's October 6 e-mail." Id. ¶ 87. Lewis wrote to Vuori, with Rambhia copied, that "'[we] are all disappointed things didn't work out the way we had hoped. As we move forward in different directions, we wish you success in your future endeavors.'" Id.

Vuori asserts six claims against all Defendants: (1) breach of contract; (2) quantum meruit; (3) promissory estoppel; (4) unjust enrichment and quasi-contract; (5) common law misappropriation of likeness claim; and (6) commercial misappropriation of likeness under California Civil Code § 3344.



B. Evidentiary Record

1. Defendants' Evidence
Grasshopper is a Delaware limited liability company with its sole office in Jericho, New York, and all of its administrative functions, including trades, occur in that state. Lewis Decl. (dkt. 16-1) ¶¶ 2, 3, 8; Rambhia Decl. (dkt. 16-2) ¶¶ 2, 3. Grasshopper has no offices, business facilities, employees, registered agents, or documents in California. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 3, 6; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 3. "Nearly all of Grasshopper's functions occur in New York." Lewis Decl. ¶ 7. According to Lewis, security requires that "the private keys that enable Grasshopper [*12]  to make trades cannot be transported," and the business would have to shut down for any period that he was required to travel to California for this case. Lewis Decl. ¶ 8. Lewis states that Grasshopper only negotiated with Vuori "from New York," and that "the negotiations took place over the phone or by email while [Lewis] was in New York." Id. ¶ 5.

Lewis and Rambhia are members and managers of Grasshopper. Lewis Decl. ¶ 1; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 1. Both Lewis and Rambhia state that they only communicated with Vuori in their "official capacit[ies]" as Grasshopper's managers, and not in their "individual capacit[ies]." Lewis Decl. ¶ 5; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 3.

Lewis currently lives in New York and has only lived elsewhere when he attended college in Ohio. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2. He met Vuori in Nevada in 2015 and they bonded over a shared interest in gaming and entrepreneurship. Lewis Reply Decl. (dkt. 20-1) ¶ 2. In May of 2017, Lewis sent an email to Grasshopper's attorney, with a blind copy to Vuori, stating that Vuori would receive ten percent of the Fund's carry in return for:

• Evaluating macroeconomic trends in the cryptocurrency market.

• Helping us make buy and sell decisions on tokens

• Helping portfolio [*13]  companies when we engage management teams

• When we begin to expand, help us identify hiring needs

• Emotional support for the ups and downs of running a fund.

Id. ¶ 2 & Ex. 1. Lewis asked the attorney to "[l]et [them] know how much that will cost," apparently intending for the attorney to prepare a contract. Id. Ex. 1. According to Lewis, "Vuori never objected to [that] email or attempted to correct his anticipated role." Id. ¶ 3. Lewis characterizes the parties' negotiations as anticipating that Vuori would provide advisory services remotely, and that his location would be irrelevant to those services. Id. ¶ 4. Lewis did not anticipate that Vuori, who is not a licensed broker, would solicit investments for Grasshopper. Id. ¶ 5.
Lewis visited Northern California once, in September of 2017, but although he had lunch with Vuori during that visit, the purpose of his trip was not related to Vuori, they did not discuss the proposed contract, and Vuori did not provide any services to Lewis. Lewis Decl. ¶ 11. That meeting was the only time Lewis communicated with Vuori except by telephone or email. Id. ¶ 13.

In July of 2017, Lewis "became very ill and was diagnosed with Ameobiasis/E.Histolytica, [*14]  a life-threatening illness" from which he has not recovered. Id. ¶ 10. Due to Lewis's illness, the September trip to California was "incredibly stressful on [his] body and threatened his health." Id. In December of 2017, Lewis's doctor wrote that he has "Infective Colitis with Gastero [sic] Intestinal Symptoms," and that "it is best for him not to travel." Lewis Reply Decl. Ex. 3. Lewis has no plans to return to California. Lewis Decl. ¶ 11.

Lewis believes that the potential witnesses in this case do not live or work in this district. Id. ¶ 12. He identifies two potential witnesses: Matt Golden, who lives in Toronto, Canada, and David Rhodes, who lives in Rochester, New York. Id. Defendants submit a declaration by Rhodes confirming that he lives in Rochester and stating that, as the primary caregiver for his elderly parents, "it would be extremely difficult for [him] to travel to California from New York to serve as a witness." Rhodes Decl. (dkt. 16-3) ¶¶ 2-5.

Rambhia lives and works in Cleveland, Ohio, where he attends Case Western Reserve University as a second-year medical student and works remotely with Lewis on behalf of Grasshopper. Rambhia Decl. ¶¶ 2, 4, 5. Rambhia takes classes [*15]  from Monday through Friday and often has pre-clinical commitments at a hospital in evenings and on weekends. Id. ¶ 5. He is permitted only two flexible days off from school per year, and states that he might be forced to repeat a semester or suffer other adverse effects if required travel to California for this case. Id. Rambhia most recently visited Northern California in the summer of 2013, and visited Southern California in January of 2016. Id. ¶ 7. He has never visited California to conduct business for Grasshopper. Id. Flights from Cleveland to New York take less than half as long as flights from Cleveland to San Francisco. Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 7.



2. Vuori's Evidence
Vuori states that Lewis reached out to him to discuss Grasshopper in early May of 2017, and that Vuori, Lewis, and Rambhia reached an agreement for Vuori to serve as an adviser in exchange for ten percent of the Fund's carry in mid-May. Vuori Decl. (dkt. 19-1) ¶ 2. Vuori negotiated that agreement from California, and he received "the distinct impression that [Lewis and Rambhia] sought out [his] services specifically because of his ties to Silicon Valley and the Bay Area." Id. (emphasis omitted). When Vuori told Lewis [*16]  that he needed some time to review a draft memorializing their agreement, Lewis responded that a "few weeks doesn't hurt us" and that he hoped their relationship would last for ten to twenty years. Id. ¶ 12 & Ex. E.

Vuori has resided in Piedmont, California at all relevant times, and has performed all of his work for Grasshopper from California, with the exception of work that he did while on vacation in Finland. Id. ¶ 13. Vuori's work for Grasshopper has included "recruiting potential investors" in addition to providing advice, and he has reached out to several potential investors (and at least one bank) in the Bay Area, in some cases at the specific request of Lewis and Rambhia. Id. ¶¶ 3-6, 9 & Ex. D. When Vuori, Lewis, or Rambhia reached out to potential investors, they typically shared a PowerPoint presentation created by Lewis and Rambhia that "touted [Vuori's] involvement as an advisor" and included his name and likeness. Id. ¶ 4 & Ex. A.

According to Vuori, Defendants used a law firm and a bank in California, and corresponded with "many" investors in California. Id. ¶¶ 7, 10, 12. Lewis offered to meet with one such investor during his September 2017 visit to San Francisco. Id. [*17]  ¶ 7 & Ex. B. Lewis also sent an email to Vuori before that trip, stating that he would "like for the 4 of us to meet and just talk[;] you can get to know the team and also make sure we are all on the same page of where we want to go." Id. ¶ 8 & Ex. C. Lewis also acknowledged the importance of Vuori's connections to Grasshopper's investor outreach: "I feel very confident with your connections and our connections that we will get to $25MM in fee-based AUM by 11/1." Id. Ex. C.



C. The Parties' Arguments

1. Defendants' Motion
Defendants move to dismiss all of Vuori's claims on the basis that this Court lacks personal jurisdiction over all Defendants. Mot. (dkt. 16) at 1. Defendants contend that they lack sufficient minimum contacts with California. Id. Defendants also move to dismiss for improper venue under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b). Id. Alternatively, Defendants move to transfer the present action to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a). Id. at 2. Defendants assert that transfer is warranted based on the convenience of the parties and witnesses and the hardship Defendants would experience if the present action were to remain before this Court.



a. Personal Jurisdiction
 [*18] Defendants contend that this Court cannot exercise specific jurisdiction over Defendants because they lack sufficient minimum contacts with California, using the Ninth Circuit's three-part test of purposeful direction or availment, a claim arising or resulting from Defendants' forum-related activities, and circumstances such that the exercise of jurisdiction would comport with fair play and substantial justice. Id. at 4-5 (citing, e.g., Learjet, Inc. v. Oneok, Inc., 715 F.3d 716, 742 (9th Cir. 2013)).



i. Purposeful Availment or Direction
With respect to the first prong, Defendants contend that Vuori has not shown that Defendants have either "purposefully availed or purposefully directed any conduct toward California." Id. With respect to personal availment, Defendants assert that Vuori "fails to allege any claim that Defendants executed or performed a contract in California." Id. Concerning purposeful direction, Defendants contend that "there is no claim made in the Complaint that Defendants purposefully directed any actions towards California, either by directing its [sic] activities at California residents or advertising Plaintiff's alleged role in this state." Id.

Defendants argue that "the communications between the parties were alleged to have been made by email [*19]  and phone only" and assert they are insufficient to confer personal jurisdiction over Defendants because "[i]t is well-settled in the Ninth Circuit and other circuits that phone calls, mailings, and facsimile do not provide for personal jurisdiction." Id. at 7 (citing, e.g., Peterson v. Kennedy, 771 F.2d 1244, 1262 (9th Cir. 1985)). Defendants also contend that Lewis's travel to San Francisco constitutes an "isolated event," and that "some 'single or occasional acts' may create only an 'attenuated' affiliation with the forum that will not support exercise of personal jurisdiction." Id. (quoting Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475 n.18, 105 S. Ct. 2174, 85 L. Ed. 2d 528 (1985)). Defendants concede that Lewis met with Vuori in San Francisco one time, but assert that the parties did not discuss Grasshopper-related matters. Id. at 8 (citing Lewis Decl. ¶ 11). Additionally, Defendants assert that Lewis "has not returned to San Francisco since nor has any plans to return in the future." Id. (citing Lewis Decl. ¶ 10).



ii. Arising from Defendants' Forum-Related Activities
With respect to the second prong of the personal jurisdiction test, Defendants contend that none of Vuori's allegations "arise from any Grasshopper forum-related activities, other than mere email and phone conservations with [Vuori] and one vaguely described lunch with Lewis." [*20]  Id. at 8-9. Accordingly, Defendants assert that "there is no indication that but for Defendants' activities in California, [Vuori] would not have suffered loss," and that the connection to the forum is too attenuated for the Court to exercise specific personal jurisdiction. Id.



iii. Fair Play and Substantial Justice
Defendants assert that, as for the "fair play and substantial justice" prong, it would be unreasonable for this Court to exercise personal jurisdiction in the present action because of the hardship it would impose on each Defendant. Id. at 9. With respect to Grasshopper, Defendants contend that it would be burdened primarily because Grasshopper would have to shut down for any period of time that Lewis is in California, as "the private keys that enable Grasshopper to make trades cannot be transported" and are located in Jericho, New York. Id. 9-10 (citations omitted). Concerning Lewis, Defendants' main contention is that exercising personal jurisdiction over him would be unreasonable and would pose a hardship because travel associated with litigating this case in California could "cause [Lewis] serious bodily harm," due to the fact that he was recently diagnosed with Ameobiasis/E.Histolytica. Id. at 10 (citing Lewis Decl. ¶ 9-10). With [*21]  respect to Rambhia, Defendants' principal argument is that litigating this case in California would be unreasonable because it would disrupt his enrollment as a second-year medical student at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. Id.



iv. Personal Jurisdiction over Lewis and Rambhia Based on Their Roles as Members and Managers of Grasshopper
Defendants contend that, even if this Court has jurisdiction over Grasshopper, "there is no basis which allows for the Court to exercise personal jurisdiction over Defendants Lewis and Rambhia." Id. at 11. Defendants assert that "a nonresidential individual is not subject to personal jurisdiction based solely upon acts in the forum state undertaken in his or her corporate capacity." Id. at 12 (citing Grober v. Mako Prods., Inc., 686 F.3d 1335, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2012)). Defendants further assert that Vuori's "claims against Defendants Lewis and Rambhia are based solely on their roles as managing members of Grasshopper," and therefore do not constitute a basis for this Court to exercise personal jurisdiction over Lewis and Rambhia in their individual capacities. Id.



b. Venue
Defendants contend that Vuori's Complaint should be dismissed for improper venue pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1406. Mot. at 13. Defendants argue that Vuori cannot satisfy [*22]  the venue provision invoked in his complaint, 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2), which requires that a substantial part of the events giving rise to the claim occurred in this district. Id.

Alternatively, if the Court determines that venue is proper, Defendants contend that this case should be transferred to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1404. Id. at 17. Defendants assert that, "if venue is found to be proper in this District, the Court may nonetheless find that transfer is warranted based on the consideration of the following factors: (1) the convenience of the parties; (2) the convenience of the witnesses; and (3) the interests of justice," with the third factor breaking down into a number of subfactors. Id. (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a)). Defendants contend that all three factors support transferring this case to the Eastern District of New York. Id. at 18.



2. Vuori's Opposition
Vuori contends that Defendants' motion should be denied in its entirety because this Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendants, venue is proper in the Northern District of California, and Defendants have not met their burden to show that the case should be transferred to the Eastern District of New York. Opp'n (dkt. 19) at 1. [*23] 



a. Personal Jurisdiction
Vuori asserts that this Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendants because Defendants sought to work with Vuori, a California resident, "specifically because of his ties to, and network of, other Californians" and because Defendants transacted business in California. Id. at 3-4.



i. Purposeful Availment
Addressing purposeful availment for the purpose of his contract claims, Vuori asserts that the Ninth Circuit has "'held that a non-resident defendant's act of soliciting business in the forum state will generally be considered purposeful availment if that solicitation results in contract negotiations or the transaction of business.'" Id. at 5 (quoting Unic Oil Compania v. Internacional De Granos E Insumos S.A. De C.V., 92 F.3d 1194 (9th Cir. 1996)) (additional citations omitted). Vuori contends that Defendants purposefully availed themselves when they: (1) "contacted Vuori in California to solicit his advisory services"; (2) "evince[d] an intent that the contract be performed in" California because "Vuori was brought on for the express purpose of gaining access to his network of California investors, thus indicating that all parties intended that he would perform his work in California"; (3) intended that the relationship be "lasting, rather than a one-off" because Defendants [*24]  stated that their "'[g]oal'" was a "'10-20 year relationship'"; and (4) engaged in dealings that show, on the whole, "contacts with California 'can in no sense be reviewed as random, fortuitous, or attenuated'" because Defendants routinely sought to utilize contacts from Vuori's California-based network to recruit investors as well as to establish a relationship with a bank in California. Id. at 6-7 (citations omitted).



ii. Purposeful Direction
Turning to his tort claims based on misappropriation of likeness, Vuori argues that a purposeful direction analysis also supports exercising jurisdiction over Defendants based on the three-part test of whether a defendant "(1) committed an intentional act, (2) expressly aimed at the forum state, (3) causing harm that the defendant knows is likely to be suffered in the forum state." Id. at 4-5, 8 (quoting Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1111). Vuori asserts that all three requirements are satisfied in this case because investors in California received Defendants' PowerPoint presentation that included Vuori's likeness and because Vuori suffered harm in California. Id. at 8-9.



iii. Arising from Defendants' Forum-Related Activities
Vuori asserts that his claims arise from Defendants' forum-related activities because [*25]  "[i]f Defendants had not done business with [Vuori] and purposefully availed themselves of the forum state, [Vuori] would have no claims against them because he would not have suffered an injury that resulted out of the alleged breach of contract." Id. at 9 (quoting Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *6) (first alteration in original).



iv. Fair Play and Substantial Justice
Vuori contends that, in determining whether exercising personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants "'comports with fair play and substantial justice' and is therefore 'reasonable,'" courts look to the following seven factors:

(1) the extent of the defendant's purposeful injection into the forum state's affairs; (2) the burden on the defendant of defending in the forum; (3) the extent of conflict with the sovereignty of the defendants' state; (4) the forum state's interest in adjudicating the dispute; (5) the most efficient judicial resolution of the controversy; (6) the importance of the forum to the plaintiff's interest in convenient and effective relief; and (7) the existence of an alternative forum.

Id. at 9-10 (quoting Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1114). Vuori contends that the first, fourth, and sixth factors favor exercising personal jurisdiction over Defendants. Id. at 10.


v. Jurisdiction over Lewis and [*26]  Rambhia in Their Individual Capacities
Regarding Defendants' argument that this Court may not exercise personal jurisdiction over Lewis and Rambhia in their individual capacities because they acted exclusively in their official capacities as members and managers of Grasshopper, Vuori contends that the Supreme Court has "'reject[ed] the suggestion that employees who act in their official capacity are somehow shielded from suit in their individual capacity.'" Id. (quoting Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc., 465 U.S. 770, 781 n.13, 104 S. Ct. 1473, 79 L. Ed. 2d 790 (1984)). Vuori asserts that, "where a corporation (or LLC) and its officers are named as defendants, the proper course is to analyze minimum contacts for each defendant individually, whether corporation or officer," and that both Lewis and Rambhia have "extensive personal contacts with California" such that this Court can exercise personal jurisdiction over them. Id. at 12-13 (citations omitted).



b. Venue
Vuori contends that "[v]enue is proper in this district so long as a 'substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred here.'" Id. at 13 (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2)). Vuori further contends that he "'need not show that the Northern District of California has the most substantial relationship to the dispute . . . or that it is the "best" [*27]  venue.'" Id. (quoting Richmond Techs., Inc. v. Aumtech Bus. Sols., No. 11-CV-02460-LHK, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71269, 2011 WL 2607158, at *10 (N.D. Cal. July 1, 2011)). Additionally, Vuori asserts that the Ninth Circuit has held that "venue in a breach of contract case lies in a district where the agreement was to be performed, because 'the place of performance is determined at the inception of the contract and therefore parties can anticipate where they may be sued.'" 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71269 [WL] at 13 (citations omitted). Accordingly, Vuori asserts that venue is proper in this District because "the parties' agreement called for Vuori to perform his advisory work here." Id. According to Vuori, Defendants' argument that the intended place of performance of the contract was in New York is incorrect because "Vuori was recruited to find new investors, build the Fund's network, and, as necessary, provide strategic guidance" in California. Id. at 14 (citing Complaint ¶¶ 65-72).



c. Transfer
Vuori contends that "Defendants base their request [to transfer the case] almost exclusively on their personal convenience, but the record demonstrates that the Northern District of California is the most practical forum for both party and third-party witnesses." Id. at 2. While Vuori acknowledges that 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a) permits this Court to transfer the [*28]  present action "to any other district or division where it might have been brought," he asserts that Defendants have not satisfied their burden of demonstrating that transfer is warranted. Id. at 14 (citations omitted).

Vuori contends that courts look to the following factors when considering a discretionary motion to transfer:

(1) the location where the relevant agreements were negotiated and executed, (2) the state that is most familiar with the governing law, (3) plaintiff's choice of forum, (4) the respective parties' contacts with the forum, (5) the contacts relating to the plaintiff's cause of action in the chosen forum, (6) the differences in the costs of litigation in the two forums, (7) the availability of compulsory process to compel attendance of unwilling non-party witnesses, and (8) the ease of access to sources of proof.

Id. at 14-15 (quoting Jones v. GNC Franchising, Inc., 211 F.3d 495, 498-99 (9th Cir. 2000)). Vuori asserts that these factors "overwhelmingly favor not transferring the action." Id. at 15.


3. Reply

a. Personal Jurisdiction
Defendants contend that Vuori has failed to establish personal jurisdiction, arguing that none of the points Vuori raised regarding Defendants' contacts with California are sufficient to satisfy his burden of establishing the first two [*29]  prongs of the Ninth Circuit's three-prong test for specific personal jurisdiction. Reply (dkt. 20) at 1-2. Regarding Vuori's first point, namely that Defendants solicited Vuori services as an advisor, Defendants assert that Vuori's residence in the Northern District of California amounts to "nothing more than an 'attenuated' affiliation with the forum with regard to the allegations made in the Complaint." Id. at 2 (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 475 n.18). Defendants also contend that Vuori "does not actually allege that Defendants reached out to [him] because he resides in the Northern District" and that "where [Vuori] lived is irrelevant as his advisory services were to be done over email and the phone." Id. at 3 (citing Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 4).

Defendants contend that Vuori attempts to raise a "new argument" that he was hired to "solicit money" from Silicon Valley investors. Id. Defendants reiterate that "the May 16, 2017 email [outlining Vuori's role with Grasshopper]—which [Vuori] claims forms the alleged agreement—does not refer to (or allude to) any solicitation services whatsoever." Id. at 4. Defendants therefore contend that "the alleged contract or promise does not relate to Defendants' California related activities." Id. at 4-5. Moreover, [*30]  Defendants argue that Vuori "cannot enforce a contract where he was to receive a percentage of the fund in exchange for soliciting investors" because he was not a licensed broker in accordance with either California or federal law. Id. at 5.

Defendants contend that the advisory services that Vuori provided are insufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over Defendants because the intended place of performance of the contract was New York, Defendants engaged in all Grasshopper-related communications with Vuori exclusively by email or phone, and Lewis performed all contract negotiations in New York. Id. Defendants reiterate that "[i]n determining minimum contacts, the Court looks to the activities of Defendants, not [Vuori]." Id. at 7. Defendants assert that Vuori's "anticipated advisory services—namely those described in the May 16, 2017 email—were not directed at California residents; rather they were to be directed at Defendants, who are New York and Cleveland residents." Id. at 7 (citing Complaint ¶¶ 7-9). Defendants also reiterate that "no meaningful link exists between those services and California" and that Vuori is unable to "satisfy his burden to show that his anticipated advisory services were [*31]  expressly aimed at California." Id. (citing Wash. Shoe Co. v. A-Z Sporting Goods Inc., 704 F.3d 668, 678-79 (9th Cir. 2012)).

Turning to Vuori's misappropriation of likeness claim, Defendants argue Vuori cannot establish personal jurisdiction over Defendants because Vuori himself "shared the Power Point presentation that touted his involvement as an advisor" and "[m]isappropriation of likeness under both common law and Civil Code section 3344 requires non-consensual use." Id. at 7-9 (citing Montana v. San Jose Mercury News, Inc., 34 Cal. App. 4th 790, 792, 40 Cal. Rptr. 2d 639 (1995)). Because Vuori "consented to the use of his likeness," Defendants assert that Vuori's claim "ha[s] no basis in fact and [Vuori] cannot meet his burden of establishing minimum contacts." Id. at 8.

Defendants also reiterate their argument that they have met their burden to show that exercising personal jurisdiction over them would be unreasonable as well as their argument that Lewis and Rambhia lack sufficient contacts with California because they acted exclusively in their roles as members and managers of Grasshopper. Id. at 8-9.



b. Venue
Defendants dispute Vuori's contention "that the events in this District are substantial enough to make venue proper," arguing that "he does not allege here that his solicitation of funds were a part of any alleged contract." Id. at 11. Defendants contend that Vuori "was not obligated or tied [*32]  to the Northern District," as "the anticipated services outlines in [Vuori's] Complaint and in the May 16, 2017 email could be performed anywhere." Id. (citing Complaint ¶ 45; Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 4). Defendants further argue that "[t]he parties always anticipated that [Vuori] would provide these services remotely" and that "[t]here is no connection to the Northern District except for [Vuori's] current and unbound location." Id. Accordingly, Defendants assert that "[n]o sufficiently substantial events occurred in the Northern District" and that venue is improper. Id.



c. Transfer
Defendants also renew their alternative request to transfer the case to New York "'[f]or the convenience of the parties and witnesses, in the interest of justice,' and based on the individualized facts of this case." Id. at 12 (quoting GNC Franchising, 211 F.3d at 498). Id. at 12-13. Concerning convenience of the parties, Defendants reiterate that: (1) Lewis "suffers from a serious illness that restricts his mobility"; (2) Grasshopper would have to shut down completely for any period of time that Lewis travels to California; and (3) "Rambhia would suffer a serious disruption to his standing in medical school." Id. at 13. Defendants also discuss other factors that courts [*33]  often look to when considering a motion to transfer. Defendants contend that the parties' contacts with this forum "do not meet the standard for minimum contacts for the personal jurisdiction." Id. at 14. With respect to California's interest in the present action, Defendants assert that this factor "is at best neutral as [Vuori] does not dispute Eastern District of New York's interest in adjudicating cases regarding companies that operate in New York." Id. at 14-15. Defendants also reiterate that "a substantial number of potential witnesses" live in or near the Eastern District of New York. Id. at 15. Finally, Defendants contend that the other factors courts often consider "are either neutral or irrelevant" and that, accordingly, if the case is not dismissed "[t]he interests of justice are best served if this case is transferred to the Eastern District of New York." Id.



III. ANALYSIS

A. Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction

1. Legal Standard for Rule 12(b)(2) Dismissal
A party may move for dismissal under Rule 12(b)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for lack of personal jurisdiction. The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing personal jurisdiction over the defendant. See Pebble Beach Co. v. Caddy, 453 F.3d 1151, 1154 (9th Cir. 2006). "Where, as here, the motion is based on written materials rather than an evidentiary [*34]  hearing, 'the plaintiff need only make a prima facie showing of jurisdictional facts.'" Id. (quoting Sher v. Johnson, 911 F.2d 1357, 1361 (9th Cir. 1990)). "Although the plaintiff cannot simply rest on the bare allegations of its complaint, . . . uncontroverted allegations in the complaint must be taken as true." Schwarzenegger v. Fred Martin Motor Co., 374 F.3d 797, 800 (9th Cir. 2004). "Conflicts between parties over statements contained in affidavits must be resolved in the plaintiff's favor." Id.

Personal jurisdiction depends on both substantive law and constitutional due process considerations. "Where . . . there is no applicable federal statute governing personal jurisdiction, the district court applies the law of the state in which the district court sits." Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1110. As Vuori's Complaint does not rely on any federal statute, the Court applies the law of California to determine whether personal jurisdiction exists. See generally Complaint. "Because California's long-arm jurisdictional statute is coextensive with federal due process requirements, the jurisdictional analyses under state law and federal due process are the same." Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1110 (citing Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 410.10).



2. Overview of Personal Jurisdiction
"For a court to exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant, that defendant must have at least 'minimum contacts' with the [*35]  relevant forum such that the exercise of jurisdiction 'does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1110-11 (quoting Int'l Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316, 66 S. Ct. 154, 90 L. Ed. 95 (1945)). "In judging minimum contacts, a court properly focuses on 'the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation.'" Calder v. Jones, 465 U.S. 783, 788, 104 S. Ct. 1482, 79 L. Ed. 2d 804 (1984) (quoting Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 204, 97 S. Ct. 2569, 53 L. Ed. 2d 683 (1977)).

Personal jurisdiction may be either general or specific. See Bancroft & Masters, Inc. v. Augusta Nat'l Inc., 223 F.3d 1082, 1086 (9th Cir. 2000). In Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S.A. v. Brown, the Supreme Court explained that "[a] court may assert general jurisdiction over foreign (sister-state or foreign-country) corporations to hear any and all claims against them when their affiliations with the State are 'so continuous and systematic' as to render them essentially at home in the forum State." Goodyear, 564 U.S. 915, 919, 131 S. Ct. 2846, 180 L. Ed. 2d 796 (2011) (citing Int'l Shoe, 326 U.S. at 317). On the other hand, the Court continued, "[s]pecific jurisdiction . . . depends on an 'affiliatio[n] between the forum and the underlying controversy,' principally, activity or an occurrence that takes place in the forum State and is therefore subject to the State's regulation." Id. (second alteration in original; citation omitted). Thus, "[i]n contrast to general, all-purpose jurisdiction, specific jurisdiction is confined to adjudication of issues deriving from, or connected [*36]  with, the very controversy that establishes jurisdiction." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Vuori does not argue that the Court has general jurisdiction over Defendants. Accordingly, the sole jurisdictional inquiry for this Court is whether there is specific jurisdiction over Defendants.

"The inquiry whether a forum State may assert specific jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant 'focuses on the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation.'" Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 134 S. Ct. 1115, 1121, 188 L. Ed. 2d 12 (2014) (quoting Keeton, 465 U.S. at 775). The exercise of specific jurisdiction is "consistent with due process" only where "the defendant's suit-related conduct . . . create[s] a substantial connection with the forum State." Id.; see also Burger King, 471 U.S. at 474 ("[T]he constitutional touchstone remains whether the defendant purposefully established 'minimum contacts' in the forum State.").

A court may exercise specific jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant where the following requirements are met:

(1) the non-resident defendant must purposefully direct his activities or consummate some transaction with the forum or resident thereof; or perform some act by which he purposefully avails himself of the privileges of conducting activities in the forum, thereby [*37]  invoking the benefits and protections of its laws;

(2) the claim must be one which arises out of or relates to the defendant's forum-related activities; and

(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must comport with fair play and substantial justice, i.e. it must be reasonable.

Dole Food, 303 F.3d at 1111. The plaintiff bears the burden of satisfying the first two prongs of the test for specific jurisdiction. Id. (citing Sher, 911 F.3d at 1361). "If the plaintiff succeeds in satisfying both of the first two prongs, then the burden shifts to the defendant to 'present a compelling case' that the exercise of jurisdiction would not be reasonable." Id. (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 476-78).
Although the first prong of the test for specific jurisdiction is often referred to as "purposeful availment," the Ninth Circuit has explained that this is "shorthand" that refers to both "purposeful availment" and "purposeful direction." Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802. These are two "distinct concepts." Id. In Yahoo! Inc. v. La Ligue Contre Le Racisme Et L'Antisemitisme, the Ninth Circuit explained that "[i]n tort cases, we typically inquire whether a defendant 'purposefully direct[s] his activities' at the forum state, applying an 'effects' test that focuses on the forum in which the defendant's actions were felt, [*38]  whether or not the actions themselves occurred within the forum," whereas "in contract cases, we typically inquire whether a defendant 'purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities' or 'consummate[s] [a] transaction' in the forum, focusing on activities such as delivering goods or executing a contract." 433 F.3d at 1206 (citations omitted) (alterations in original). "Here, although some of [Vuori's] claims sound in tort, they all arise out of the Defendants' contractual relationship with [him]. Accordingly, the Court will apply a purposeful availment analysis in evaluating Defendants' contacts with California." See Richmond Techs., Inc. v. Aumtech Bus. Sols., No. 11-CV-02460-LHK, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71269, 2011 WL 2607158, at *4 (N.D. Cal. July 1, 2011); see also Sher, 911 F.2d at 1362 (employing the purposeful availment test when some of the claims at issue sounded in tort, but all claims arose from a contractual relationship between the parties).



3. Purposeful Availment
"A showing that a defendant purposefully availed himself of the privilege of doing business in a forum state typically consists of evidence of the defendant's action in the forum, such as executing or performing a contract there." Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802 (quoting Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253, 78 S. Ct. 1228, 2 L. Ed. 2d 1283 (1958)). "[A] contract alone does not automatically establish minimum contacts [*39]  in the plaintiff's home forum." Picot v. Weston, 780 F.3d 1206, 1212 (9th Cir. 2004) (quoting Boschetto v. Hansing, 539 F.3d 1011, 1017 (9th Cir. 2008)). Rather, a "contract is only an intermediate step that connects prior negotiations with future consequences, the real object of a business transaction." Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *3. Accordingly, courts consider "prior negotiations and contemplated future consequences, along with terms of the contract and the parties' actual course of dealing." Burger King, 471 U.S. at 479. "As the Ninth Circuit made plain in Picot v. Weston, the inquiry is limited to examining the defendant's conduct in the jurisdiction, not [the plaintiff's conduct]." Netgear, Inc. v. Redzone Wireless, LLC, No. 16-cv-06974-BLF, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83506, 2017 WL 2351359, at *3 (N.D. Cal. May 31, 2017) (citing Picot, 780 F.3d at 1213).



a. Prior Negotiations
"[I]f the defendant directly solicits business in the forum state, the resulting transactions will probably constitute the deliberate transaction of business invoking the benefits of the forum state's laws." Decker Coal, 805 F.2d at 840; see also Shute v. Carnival Cruise Lines, 897 F.2d 377, 381 (9th Cir. 1990) ("Soliciting business in the forum state will generally be considered purposeful availment if that solicitation results in contract negotiations or the transaction of business."), rev'd on other grounds, 499 U.S. 585, 111 S. Ct. 1522, 113 L. Ed. 2d 622 (1991).

In a declaration attached to his Opposition, Vuori states that he is a "Piedmont, California-based entrepreneur" and that Defendants contacted him to discuss [*40]  "an arrangement through which [Vuori] would serve as an advisor to Grasshopper in exchange for a percentage of the Fund's profits." Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 1-2. He further states that he engaged in all prior negotiations in California and that he performed all of his services for Grasshopper while in California, except during time he spent in Finland on a family vacation. Id. ¶ 2. Regarding the nature of his services, Vuori states that his two primary roles as an advisor were to recruit potential investors and to provide strategic guidance. Id. ¶ 3. With respect to potential investors, Vuori states that he "reached out on Grasshopper's behalf to numerous California-based investors." Id. ¶ 4. He also states that he "put Lewis and Rambhia in touch with bankers at Silicon Valley Bank," and that "Lewis indicated . . . that he hoped to hire [Silicon Valley Bank] to do work on Grasshopper Capital's behalf." Id. ¶ 9.

Lewis, on the other hand, states that the parties' negotiations anticipated that Vuori would work "remotely, via phone and email" and that Vuori's "location at the time he was to provide these advisory services was irrelevant to what [Defendants] were asking him to do." Lewis Reply Decl. [*41]  ¶ 2. Lewis also states that "Grasshopper engaged only in negotiations with [Vuori] regarding an advisory deal with Grasshopper from New York." Lewis Decl. ¶ 5. Furthermore, Lewis disputes the nature of Vuori's role as an advisor. In particular, Lewis states that Defendants "never anticipated" that Vuori "would be soliciting investments for Grasshopper as part of any agreement." Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 5.

The location where parties engaged in negotiations does not support a finding of purposeful availment, as Vuori does not dispute Lewis's contention that Defendants did not travel to California to engage in negotiations. See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *4 (citing McGlinchy v. Shell Chem. Co., 845 F.2d 802, 816 (9th Cir. 1988)); see also LocusPoint Networks, LLC v. D.T.V., LLC, No. 3:14-cv-01278-JSC, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869, 2014 WL 3836792, at *5 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 1, 2014). Similarly, Defendants' negotiations with Vuori by telephone and by email do not support purposeful availment. Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *4; see also Roth v. Garcia Marquez, 942 F.2d 617, 622 (9th Cir. 1991) ("[U]se of the mails, telephone, or other international communications simply do not qualify as purposeful activity invoking the benefits and protection of the [forum] state." (internal quotation marks omitted) (second alteration in original)).

Vuori's statements regarding his prior negotiations with Defendants as well as his statements regarding the nature of his work, [*42]  however, favor a finding of purposeful availment. Defendants do not dispute that Vuori was a California resident during the time of the alleged negotiations. Furthermore, it is apparent that they were aware that Vuori was in California during at least part of the time period at issue, as Lewis met with him in California while negotiating a written contract. Lewis Decl. (dkt. 16-1) ¶ 11 ("I was in San Francisco from September 17th to 19th . . . At the time, the contract was being negotiated and Vuori was reviewing the proposal. I did meet with Vuori for lunch but . . . we did not discuss the proposal and he did not provide me any services."). While Defendants contest the precise nature of Vuori's work, and whether it required him to be in California, "[s]uch factual disputes. . . must be resolved in [Vuori's] favor." See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *4 (citing Pebble Beach, 453 F.3d at 1154). Vuori's declaration that he understood Defendants to be interested in his ties to Silicon Valley, Vuori Decl. ¶ 2, his activities reaching out to potential investors in California at Defendants' specific request, id. ¶ 6, and Lewis's statement in an email that he believed Vuori's "connections" would allow Defendants to reach their desired volume of investment, [*43]  id. Ex. C, are sufficient in this context for the Court to infer that Defendants "solicited and negotiated with [Vuori], a California resident, to perform services on their behalf in California and to help them expand their business presence in California" as part of his advisory services to Grasshopper. See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *4.



b. Future Consequences
"Under the second factor, '[p]arties who reach out beyond one state and create continuing relationships and obligations with citizens of another state are subject to regulation and sanctions in the other State for the consequences of their activities.'" 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869 [WL] at *5 (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 473) (internal quotation marks omitted) (alteration in original); see also LocusPoint, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869, 2014 WL 3836792, at *5. Vuori states that he "reached an agreement" with Defendants where he would perform advisory services for Grasshopper "in exchange for a percentage of the Fund's profits." Vuori Decl. ¶ 2. He states that, when he informed Lewis and Rambhia that he "need[ed] to give his attorneys time to review a draft agreement" regarding his role as an advisor, they replied that "a delay of '[a] few weeks doesn't hurt'" them because their "'[g]oal is [a] 10-20 year relationship.'" Id. at ¶ 12 (quoting id. Ex. E) (first alteration in original). [*44]  While Defendants argue that they intended Vuori to perform his services remotely and that "Vuori's location at the time he was to provide these advisory services was irrelevant to what we were asking him to do," they still expressed that their goal was to forge a multi-year relationship with Vuori, a California resident. See LocusPoint, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869, 2014 WL 3836792, at *6 (finding that, despite the defendant's contentions that "all the future cooperation in connection with the contract [did] not affect California," the parties, namely a California resident plaintiff and a nonresident defendant, had "significant continuing obligations to each other under the Agreement" that "favor[ed] a finding of purposeful availment"). Accordingly, Defendants' stated goal of a multi-year relationship with Vuori, a California resident, in addition to their intent, as discussed above, that Vuori provide business connections in California, supports a finding of purposeful availment.



c. Terms
"Terms that provide fair notice to a defendant that he may possibly be subject to suit in the forum state weigh in favor of a purposeful availment finding." Id. (citations omitted); see also Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *5. Neither party addresses whether the terms of the parties' oral agreement [*45]  favor a finding of purposeful availment in a meaningful way, and none of the parties' correspondence in the record discusses forum selection for possible disputes. Accordingly, this factor is neutral and does not weigh in favor of or against a finding of purposeful availment.



d. Course of Dealing
The "quality and nature" of Defendants' relationship with Vuori in California "can in no sense be viewed as random, fortuitous, or attenuated." See Burger King, 471 U.S. at 480 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 602591, at *6; LocusPoint, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869, 2014 WL 3836792, at *7. As mentioned above, Lewis states that "[i]t was never anticipated by [him] or by anyone that Vuori would be serving as a broker or that he would be soliciting investments for Grasshopper as part of any agreement." Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 5. Vuori states, however, that one of his responsibilities as an advisor to Grasshopper was to recruit potential investors. Vuori Decl. ¶ 4. He further states that he introduced Lewis and Rambhia to California-based investors, that he "was involved in [Defendants'] outreach efforts" to numerous investors based in California, and that he "reach[ed] out to specific individuals based in California" at Lewis and Rambhia's request. Id. ¶ 4-7. Moreover, Lewis also acknowledged [*46]  in his July 22, 2017 email to Vuori the importance of Vuori's contacts to Defendants' ability to secure investments. Id. Ex. C. In the context of the present motion, this factual dispute must be resolved in Vuori's favor. See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *4 (citing Pebble Beach, 453 F.3d at 1154). Taken together, the record supports a finding of purposeful availment.



4. Claims Arising out of Defendants' Forum-Related Activities
The Ninth Circuit employs a "'but for' test" to determine whether the plaintiff's claims arise out of or relate to the defendants' conduct. Menken v. Emm, 503 F.3d 1050, 1058 (9th Cir. 2007). "This requirement is met if, but for a defendant's forum-related activities through which a defendant purposely avails itself of the forum, the plaintiff would not have suffered injury." Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *6 (quoting Callaway Golf Corp. v. Royal Canadian Golf Ass'n, 125 F. Supp. 2d 1194, 1204 (C.D. Cal. 2000) (internal quotation marks omitted). As discussed above, if Defendants had not purposefully availed themselves of the privilege of conducting business in California by working with Vuori, then Vuori would not have any claims against Defendants. See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *6 ("If Defendants had not done business with Plaintiff and purposefully availed themselves of the forum state, Plaintiff would have no claims against them because he would not have suffered an injury that resulted out of the alleged breach of contract."). [*47]  Vuori's claims arise out of Defendants' forum-related activities.



5. Reasonableness
The third prong of the test "examines whether the exercise of jurisdiction would be reasonable." Menken, 503 F.3d at 1058. Because Vuori "has satisfied the first two prongs of the test, the burden shifts to Defendants to present a compelling case that the exercise of personal jurisdiction would be unreasonable." Id. (citing Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802). The Ninth Circuit has set forth the following seven factors to determine reasonableness, none of which are dispositive:

(1) the extent of defendants' purposeful interjection into the forum state's affairs; (2) the burden on the defendant on defending in the forum; (3) the extent of conflict with the sovereignty of the defendants' state; (4) the forum state's interest in adjudicating the dispute; (5) the most efficient judicial resolution of the controversy; (6) the importance of the forum to the plaintiff's interest in convenient and effective relief; and (7) the existence of an alternative forum.

Id. (quoting CE Distrib., LLC v. New Sensor Corp., 380 F.3d 1107, 1112 (9th Cir. 2004)).


a. Purposeful Injection
The analysis of purposeful interjection into the forum state's affairs "parallels the question of minimum contacts" in determining the reasonableness of an exercise of specific [*48]  jurisdiction. Amoco Egypt Oil Co. v. Leonis Nav. Co., Inc., 1 F.3d 848, 852 (9th Cir. 1993); see also Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 Wl 6024591, at *6 ("The first factor depends on the same analysis that applies to purposeful availment.") (citing Roth , 942 F.2d at 623). For the reasons stated above, namely that Defendants purposefully availed themselves of the privileges of conducting business in California when they sought out Vuori, a California resident, to conduct business on their behalf, this factor favors a finding of reasonableness.



b. Burden on Defendants
To warrant dismissal on the basis of burden, Defendants must show that litigating in California is "so gravely difficult and inconvenient that it violates due process." See Burger King, 471 U.S. at 485; see also Hirsch v. Blue Cross, Blue Shield of Kan. City, 800 F.2d 1474, 1481 (9th Cir. 1986) ("Unless such inconvenience [to Defendants] is so great as to constitute a deprivation of due process, it will not overcome clear justifications for the exercise of jurisdiction." (citation omitted)). Defendants contend that they would experience financial burdens associated with traveling to California and hiring local counsel in order to litigate this case here. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 6, 9; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 6. Defendants contend that Grasshopper would be burdened by litigating this case here because "none of the documents, records, files, officers, or members of Grasshopper are located in California," [*49]  and because Grasshopper would have to temporarily shut down if Lewis was required to leave New York. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 6, 8. As to Lewis, Defendants contend that he has been diagnosed with Ameobasis/E.Histolytica and advised by his physician that he should not travel. Lewis Reply. Decl. ¶ 6 & Ex. 2. Although Lewis previously traveled to San Francisco after his diagnosis, he states that the experience "was incredibly stressful on [his] body and threatened [his] health." Lewis Decl. ¶ 10. Regarding Rambhia, Defendants contend that litigating his case here would "severely impact [his] lessons, grades, and post-school opportunities." Rambhia Decl. ¶ 5.

The travel-related and financial burdens associated with litigating this case here are not in themselves so severe as to constitute a deprivation of due process. See Panavision Int'l, L.P. v Toeppen, 141 F.3d 1316, 1323 (9th Cir. 1998) (finding that the burden on the defendant, an Illinois resident, of litigating the case in California was "not so great as to deprive him of due process"); see also Viz Commc'ns, Inc. v. Redsun, No. C-01-04235 JF, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26104, 2003 WL 23901766, at *5 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 28, 2003) ("[M]odern communication makes participation in the instant litigation much less onerous [than] in the past."). Defendants have not cited authority addressing circumstances comparable [*50]  to the potentially detrimental effects of travel on Lewis's health, Rambhia's studies, or Grasshopper's operations, nor have they addressed the extent to which those risks would remain in the future if the case eventually goes to trial.2Link to the text of the note This factor weighs against a finding of reasonableness, but is not dispositive.



c. Sovereignty of Defendants' State
"This factor is a lesser barrier to reasonableness when the defendant resides in another state rather than in a foreign nation." Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *7 (citations omitted). Furthermore, "Defendants have not really explained how litigation in California would conflict with the sovereignty of their states." Cont'l Appliances, Inc. v. Thomas, No. C-12-1310 EMC, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 119871, 2012 WL 3646887 (N.D. Cal. Aug 23, 2012) (finding that this factor supported reasonableness in a case arising under federal and California law against nonresident defendants from Georgia and Kentucky); see also LocusPoint, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869, 2014 WL 3836792, at *9 ("[S]ince Defendant is not from a foreign nation and has not demonstrated that a conflict with the sovereignty of its home state exists, this factor does not weigh against the reasonableness component of personal jurisdiction."). As in Thomas and LocusPoint, this factor does not weigh against reasonableness under the circumstances of this case.



d. [*51]  Forum State's Interest
This factor weighs in favor of reasonableness. Where a plaintiff resides in California and the injury occurs here, California has a strong interest in adjudicating the dispute. "A state generally has a manifest interest in providing its residents with a convenient forum for redressing injuries inflicted by out-of-state actors." Burger King, 471 U.S. at 473 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Vuori is a California resident. Accordingly, "California has an interest in providing itself as a forum for resolving the dispute." Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at * 7; see also LocusPoint, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105869,, 2014 WL 383672, at * 9.



e. Efficient Judicial Resolution
This factor "requires the Court to evaluate where the witnesses and evidence are likely to be located." Autodesk, Inc. v. Kobayashi † Zedda Architects Ltd., 191 F. Supp. 3d 1007, 1019 (N.D. Cal. 2016) (citing Core-Vent Corp. v. Nobel Indus. AB, 11 F.3d 1482, 1489 (9th Cir. 1993)). "[E]ven if Defendant[s] demonstrated that most of the witnesses and evidence were located elsewhere, this factor is no longer heavily weighted in light of modern technology." Id. at 1020 (citing Harris Rutsky & Co. Ins. Servs., Inc. v. Bell & Clements (London) Ltd., 328 F.3d 1122, 1133 (9th Cir. 2003)). Vuori has identified potential witnesses located in California, and Defendants have identified potential witnesses on the East Coast and in Canada. Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 5-7; Lewis Decl. ¶ 12; Rhodes Decl. ¶ 2. Defendants also assert that all of Grasshopper's documents, records, and files are not [*52]  in California. Lewis Decl. ¶ 6. At most, this factor slightly weighs against a finding of reasonableness.



f. Plaintiff's Interest
"The sixth factor favors a finding of reasonableness because it will indeed be more convenient for [Vuori] to litigate the case in the same state where he resides." See Long, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142729, 2016 WL 6024591, at *7.



g. Alternative Forum
Regarding the existence of an alternative forum, "the test is not whether the current forum state is more convenient for [Vuori], but rather whether [Vuori] would be precluded from adjudicating the dispute in a different forum." Id. (citing Roth, 942 F.2d at 624-25). Vuori "bears the burden of proving the unavailability of an alternative forum." Roth, 942 F.2d at 624-25 (citations omitted). Vuori has not shown that he could not litigate the present action in another forum. Accordingly, this factor favors Defendants.

* * *

In determining whether litigating this case in California would be reasonable, factors one, three, four, and six favor a finding of reasonableness. Factors two, five, and seven weigh against a finding of reasonableness, but factor five is not heavily weighted. The Court concludes that it is reasonable to exercise personal jurisdiction over Defendants in California.



6. Jurisdiction over Lewis and Rambhia [*53]  in Their Individual Capacities
Defendants contend that Vuori "makes no argument or showing as to why this Court should disregard the corporate form, or how Lewis and Rambhia have their own minimum contacts with the forum outside of Grasshopper." Reply at 10. "Under the fiduciary shield doctrine, a person's mere association with a corporation that causes injury in the forum state is not sufficient in itself to permit that forum to assert jurisdiction over the person." Davis v. Metro Prods., Inc., 885 F.2d 515, 521 (9th Cir. 1989). "On the other hand, [Defendants'] status as employees does not somehow insulate them from jurisdiction. Each defendant's contacts with the forum State must be assessed individually." Calder, 465 U.S. at 790; see also Keeton, 465 U.S. at 781 n.13 ("[W]e today reject the suggestion that employees who act in their official capacity are somehow shielded from suit in their individual capacity."). "Thus in both Calder and Keeton, the Supreme Court applied the constitutional due process analysis to the contacts of the individuals concerned; it did not consider the existence of a state-created corporate form to create a due process limit on jurisdiction." Davis, 885 F.2d at 521.

"Cases which have found personal liability on the part of corporate officers have typically involved instances where the [*54]  defendant was the 'guiding spirit' between the wrongful conduct, . . . or the 'central figure' in the challenged corporate activity." Davis, 885 F.2d at 523 n.10 (quoting Escude Cruz v. Ortho Pharm. Corp., 619 F.2d 902, 907 (1st Cir. 1980)); see also Allstar, 666 F. Supp. 2d at 1120 ("Courts have thus found a corporate officer's contacts on behalf of a corporation sufficient to subject the officer to personal jurisdiction where the officer is a primary participant in the alleged wrongdoing or had control of and direct participation in the alleged activities." (citations omitted, internal quotation marks omitted, and punctuation altered)).

For the reasons described above, it is clear from the record that Lewis and Rambhia were the central figures in the challenged corporate activity. Lewis and Rambhia are not only members and managers of Grasshopper, but also both engaged in correspondence and negotiations with Vuori regarding Vuori's service as an advisor to Grasshopper. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 1, 6; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 1; Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 1-2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12 & Exs. C-E; Lewis Reply Decl. ¶¶ 1-2, 3 & Ex. 1. Accordingly, they purposefully availed themselves of the forum. See Rimes v. Noteware Dev. LLC, No. C-09-0281 EMC, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80284, 2010 WL 3069250, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 4, 2010) (finding that a defendant acting in his official capacity [*55]  as a managing member of a limited liability company purposefully availed himself of the forum when he prepared an initial draft of a compensation agreement and sent a reply letter regarding the payment of merit bonuses). But for Lewis and Rambhia's correspondence and negotiations, Vuori would not have any claims in the present action. See id. (concluding that, but for the defendant's actions as a managing member of a limited liability company, the plaintiff would not have a cause of action). Lewis and Rambhia's status as officers of Grasshopper does not alter the conclusion that it is reasonable for this Court to exercise personal jurisdiction over them.



7. Defendants' Arguments Concerning Vuori Soliciting Investments
In their Reply, Defendants contend that Vuori "improperly attempts to create a new argument in his Opposition that he contracted with Defendants to solicit Silicon Valley investors in order to establish minimum contacts." Reply at 4. Moreover, Defendants contend that Vuori cannot enforce such an arrangement because Vuori is not a licensed broker in accordance with federal and California law. Id. at 5. To the extent Defendants believe Vuori cannot show that the parties intended [*56]  his role with Grasshopper to include developing connections to potential investors and other business partners in California, the Court disagrees for the reasons discussed above. As for the argument that such an arrangement would be illegal and unenforceable, and that an unenforceable agreement would deprive this Court of personal jurisdiction over Defendants, the Court declines to resolve such an issue raised for the first time in Defendants' reply brief. See Cal. Sportfishing Prot. Alliance v. Pac. States Indus., Inc., No. 15-cv-01482-JD, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 127871, 2015 WL 5569073, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Sept. 22, 2015) (declining to consider arguments raised for the first time in a reply). This holding is without prejudice to Defendants raising the issue at a later stage of the case addressing the merits of Vuori's claims.



B. Motion to Dismiss for Improper Venue

1. Legal Standard for Rule 12(b)(3) Dismissal
A party may bring a motion to dismiss an action for improper venue pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(3). When venue is improper, the court "shall dismiss, or if it be in the interest of justice, transfer such a case to any district or division in which it could have been brought." 28 U.S.C. § 1406(a). Plaintiff bears the burden of showing that venue is proper. See Piedmont Label Co. v. Sun Garden Packing Co., 598 F.2d 491, 496 (9th Cir. 1979). Generally, a plaintiff asserting multiple claims must [*57]  establish that venue is proper as to each claim. Adobe Sys., Inc. v. Childers, No. 5:10-cv-03571-JF/HRL, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14534, 2011 WL 566812, at *7 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 14, 2011) (citation omitted). "Once a court has determined that venue is proper as to one claim," however, "it may exercise pendent venue to adjudicate closely related claims." United Tactical Sys. LLC v. Real Action Paintball, Inc., 108 F. Supp. 3d 733, 753 (N.D. Cal. 2015); see also Flamingo Indus. (USA) Ltd. v. U.S. Postal Serv., 302 F.3d 985, 997-98 (9th Cir. 2002), rev'd on other grounds, 540 U.S. 736, 124 S. Ct. 1321, 158 L. Ed. 2d 19 (2004).

On a motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(3), "the pleadings need not be accepted as true, and the court may consider facts outside of the pleadings." Murphy v. Schneider Nat'l, Inc., 362 F.3d 1133, 1137 (9th Cir. 2004) (citations omitted). Whether to permit discovery relating to venue is within the Court's discretion. Trusted Health Prods., Inc. v. Blue Cross Labs., Inc., No. 5:13-375-DCR, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 98370, 2014 Wl 3586256, at *2 (E.D. Ky. July 21, 2014) (citations omitted). Dismissal, rather than transfer, may be appropriate where the transfer would be futile because the case would be dismissed even after transfer. See Altin Havayolu Tasamaciligi Turizm Ve Tic v. Sinnarajah, No. C-07-6475 EDL, 2008 WL 691851, at *5 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 12, 2008) (citing King v. Russell, 963 F.2d 1301, 1304 (9th Cir. 1992)).



2. Venue Is Proper in This District
The question of whether venue is "wrong" or "improper" is typically governed by 28 U.S.C. § 1391. Atl. Marine Constr. Co. v. U.S. Dist. Court for W. Dist. of Tex., 571 U.S. 49, 134 S. Ct. 568, 577, 187 L. Ed. 2d 487 (2013). That statute provides that civil actions may be brought in:

(1) a judicial district in which any defendant resides, if all defendants are residents of the State in [*58]  which the district is located;

(2) a judicial district in which a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred, or a substantial part of property that is the subject of the action is situated; or

(3) if there is no district in which an action may otherwise be brought as provided in this section, any judicial district in which any defendant is subject to the court's personal jurisdiction with respect to such an action.

28 U.S.C. § 1391(b); see also Atl. Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 577.
Vuori asserts that venue is proper in this District because "a substantial part of the events giving rise to the claims occurred here." Complaint ¶ 13. "Section 1391(b)(2) does not require that a majority of the events have occurred in the district where suit is filed, nor does it require that the events in that district predominate." Rodriguez v. Cal. Highway Patrol, 89 F. Supp. 2d 1131, 1136 (N.D. Cal. 2000) (citations omitted). "All that Plaintiffs need show is that a substantial part of the events giving rise to their claims occurred in the Northern District of California." Id.; see also Richmond Techs., 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71269, 2011 WL 2607158, at *10 ("Plaintiff need not show that the Northern District of California has the most substantial relationship to the dispute . . . or that it is the 'best' venue."). Accordingly, "'for venue to be proper, significant events or omissions [*59]  material to the plaintiff's claim must have occurred in the district in question, even if other material events occurred elsewhere." Richmond Techs., 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71269, 2011 WL 2607158, at *10 (quoting Gulf Ins. Co. v. Glasbrenner, 417 F.3d 353, 357 (2d Cir. 2005)).

Venue is proper in this District. Vuori alleges that he engaged in negotiations and performed the bulk of his duties as an advisor in California. Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 2, 13. Both Lewis and Rambhia state that they engaged in negotiations with Vuori from New York and Ohio by phone and email. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 3. In their moving papers, Defendants contend that "the intended performance of the alleged contract was in New York." Mot. at 15. There is no dispute, however, that Vuori was a California resident for the time period at issue, and Lewis concedes in his reply declaration that "[t]he negotiations contemplating the agreement between Grasshopper and Niko Vuori anticipated that Vuori would provide the services . . . remotely," presumably from California. Lewis Reply Decl. at ¶ 4. Nor is there any indication that the parties expected Vuori to perform any of his contractual obligations in New York. Furthermore, even though events regarding the present action occurred elsewhere, namely in New York and in Ohio, Vuori's efforts in this District [*60]  are significant and constitute "a substantial part of the events giving rise to [his] claims." See Rodriguez, 89 F. Supp. 2d at 1136.3Link to the text of the note



C. Motion to Transfer

1. Legal Standard for Transfer Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a)
A case may be transferred "[f]or the convenience of the parties and witnesses, in the interests of justice," to "any other district or division where it might have been brought." 28 U.SC. § 1404(a). There are two prongs to this analysis. First, the transferee district must be a district where the case could have originally been filed, meaning the court has jurisdiction and venue is proper. Wireless Consumers Alliance, Inc. v. T-Mobile USA, Inc., No. C 03-3711 MHP, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26802, 2003 WL 22387598, at *1 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 14, 2003). The moving party bears the burden to prove this first step. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Savage, 611 F.2d 270, 279 (9th Cir. 1979)). If the first prong is satisfied, the court decides whether to grant or deny a motion to transfer, balancing "the plaintiff's interest to freely choose a litigation forum against the aggregate considerations of convenience of the defendants and witnesses and the interest of justice." Wireless Consumers, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26802, 2003 WL 22387598, at *1; 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a). The Ninth Circuit has identified the following factors as relevant in determining whether to transfer a contract case:

(1) the location where the relevant agreements were negotiated [*61]  and executed, (2) the state that is most familiar with the governing law, (3), the plaintiff's choice of forum, (4) the respective parties' contacts with the forum, (5) the contacts relating to the plaintiff's cause of action in the chosen forum, (6) the differences in the costs of litigation in the two forums, (7) the availability of compulsory process to compel attendance of unwilling non-party witnesses, and (8) the ease of access to sources of proof.

GNC Franchising, 211 F.3d at 498-99. Some district courts have framed the relevant factors as follows:
(1) the plaintiff's choice of forum; (2) convenience of the parties; (3) convenience of the witnesses; (4) ease of access to the evidence; (5) familiarity of each forum with the applicable law; (6) feasibility of consolidation with other claims; (7) any local interest in the controversy; and (8) the relative court congestion and time of trial in each forum.

Royal Queentex Enters. Inc. v. Sara Lee Corp., No. C-99-4787 (MJJ), 2000 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10139, 2000 WL 246599, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 1, 2000) (citing Decker Coal, 805 F.2d at 843 (9th Cir. 1986)). "These factors are non-exhaustive and the Court ultimately has discretion in deciding which factors to consider and whether they weigh in favor of transfer." Hendricks v. StarKist Co., No. 13-cv-729 YGR, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245880, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 25, 2014) (citing Williams v. Bowman, 157 F. Supp. 2d 1103, 1106 (N.D. Cal. 2001)).


2. This Case Could Have Been Brought in the [*62]  Eastern District of New York
This prong is satisfied because the Eastern District of New York has jurisdiction to hear the case and venue would be proper. The Eastern District of New York has original subject matter jurisdiction over the present action because the parties are completely diverse and the amount in controversy exceeds $75,000. 28 U.S.C. § 1332. Lewis, Rambhia, and Grasshopper are subject to personal jurisdiction in the Eastern District of New York. Lewis is a resident of the Eastern District of New York. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2. Grasshopper's officers are located in the Eastern District of New York. Id. at ¶ 3. The Court assumes for the sake of argument that Rambhia, although he lives in Cleveland, is subject to personal jurisdiction in the Eastern District of New York based on his working relationship as a member and manager of Grasshopper. Venue is also proper because a substantial part of the events giving rise to the present action occurred in the Eastern District of New York, as Lewis conducted all negotiations with Vuori while Lewis was in New York. Lewis Decl. ¶ 5. Vuori does not address whether he could have brought suit in the Eastern District of New York or argue that this requirement [*63]  bars transfer. See Opp'n at 14-16.



3. Relevant Factors Do Not Favor Transfer

a. Convenience of the Parties and Witnesses
Vuori states that it would be more convenient for him to litigate this case here, as he "ha[s] responsibilities to [his] wife and young children and [his] work as a consultant for several San Francisco-based startups" that "require [his] regular presence in the Bay Area." Vuori Decl. ¶ 14. Vuori also identifies several potential non-party witnesses located in California, id. at ¶¶ 5-7, 9, but does not specify the relevance of their testimony, although they appear to be witnesses to the investor related services that Vuori alleges he agreed to provide. See Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245880, at * 3 ("In establishing inconvenience to witnesses, the moving party must name the witnesses, state their location, and explain their testimony and its relevance." (quoting Costco Wholesale Corp. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 472 F. Supp. 2d 1183, 1193 (S.D. Cal. 2007))).

Defendants contend that they would experience financial hardships as a result of traveling to California to litigate this case here. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 6, 9; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 6. Lewis also states that traveling to California would impose a burden on him for health reasons. Lewis Reply Decl. ¶ 6 & Ex. 2. Rambhia states that he would experience a hardship [*64]  if he had to travel to litigate the present matter here because it would impact his studies as a second-year medical student at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. Rambhia Decl. ¶ 5. Concerning Grasshopper, Defendants contend that litigating the case here would be inconvenient because the business would have to shut down during any time Lewis was in California as and because all of its documents, records, and files are located outside of California. Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 6, 8. Defendants have also provided a declaration in which David Rhodes, a potential witness, states that traveling to California would pose a hardship for him because he is a primary caregiver for his elderly parents. Rhodes Decl. ¶¶ 3, 5.

Taking into account that "[t]he convenience of non-party witnesses is a more important factor than the convenience of party witnesses," Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245880, at *3 (citation omitted), this factor does not favor a change of venue.



b. Interests of Justice
"In evaluating the interest of justice, a court may consider 'public interest factors such as court congestion, local interest in deciding controversies, conflicts of laws, and burdening citizens in an unrelated forum with jury duty." Park v. Dole Fresh Vegetables, Inc., 964 F. Supp. 2d 1088, 1096 (N.D. Cal. 2013) (citations omitted). [*65]  While neither party has addressed these factors in their moving papers in any meaningful way, none of the factors support transfer.

According to United States Courts statistics from September 2017, the Eastern District of New York had 12,681 cases pending, and the Northern District of California had 9,127 cases pending. The median times from filing to disposition and filing to trial for civil cases are 7.2 months to 24.8 months, respectively, in the Northern District of California, and 9.2 months and 38.1 months, respectively, in the Eastern District of New York.4Link to the text of the note "The real issue is not whether a dismissal will reduce a court's congestion but whether a trial may be speedier in another court because of its less crowded docket." Gates v. Learjet Corp. v. Jensen, 743 F.2d 1325, 1337 (9th Cir. 1984). Accordingly, this factor weighs against transfer.

Concerning local interest in deciding the present action, California has a greater interest in this dispute because the claims arise under California law. Van Slyke v. Capital One Bank, 503 F. Supp. 2d 1353, 1365 (N.D. Cal. 2007). "Concurrent with the local-interest factor is the issue of burdening citizens of an unrelated forum with jury duty." Id. Because Vuori's claims arise under California law, this forum is related to the present action. Id. These factors also weigh against [*66]  transfer.

No party has identified conflicts of law pertaining to this case. Based on the issues of court congestion and local interests, the public interest as a whole weighs against transfer.



c. Location Where Agreement Was Negotiated and Executed
This factor is neutral, as the parties in the present action negotiated the agreement in question in California, Ohio, and New York. Lewis Decl. ¶ 5; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 3; Vuori Decl. ¶ 2.



d. State Most Familiar With Governing Law
Although some courts have concluded that "[a] California district court is more familiar with California law than district courts in other states," Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245990, at *5 (citations omitted), a number of courts have held that "[f]ederal courts have an equal ability to address claims arising out of state law." E.g., Bloom v. Express Servs., Inc., No. C 11-00009 CRB, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43429, 2011 WL 1481402, at *5 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 19, 2011). "District courts regularly apply the law of states other than the forum state." Turrett Steel Corp. v. Manuel Int'l. Inc., 612 F. Supp. 387, 390 (W.D. Pa. 1985). Thus, "this factor is to be accorded little weight . . . because federal courts are deemed capable of applying the substantive law of other states." Rindfleisch v. Gentiva Health Sys., Inc., 752 F. Supp. 2d 246, 261 (E.D.N.Y. 2010) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). This Court may be a marginally better forum for Vuori's state law claims, but this factor is not particularly significant.



e. Plaintiff's Choice of Forum [*67] 
"Generally, the Court accords special weight to the plaintiff's choice of forum and the defendant 'must make a strong showing of inconvenience to warrant upsetting the plaintiff's choice of forum.'" PRG-Schultz USA, Inc. v. Gottschalks, Inc., No. C 05-2811 MMC, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 42272, 2005 WL 2649206, at * 4 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 17, 2005) (quoting Decker Coal, 805 F.3d at 843). Although not dispositive, see id., this factor weighs against transfer, as Vuori chose to litigate the present action in this District.



f. The Respective Parties' Contacts with the Forum
As discussed above, Vuori is a California resident. Vuori Decl. ¶ 1. Lewis is a resident of New York, and Rambhia currently lives in Ohio. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 2. Grasshopper is a limited liability company organized under the laws of Delaware with its offices in New York. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2. Lewis and Rambhia do not have property or offices in California. Id. ¶¶ 4, 9; Rambhia Decl. ¶¶ 4, 6. Grasshopper does not have any offices, employees, or registered agents for service of process in California. Lewis Decl. ¶ 3. As described above, however, Defendants have contacts with the forum in that they purposefully availed themselves of the benefits of conducting business in California [*68]  when they sought Vuori's services as an advisor. Accordingly, this factor on balance weighs against transfer.



g. The Contacts Relating to Plaintiff's Cause of Action in the Chosen Forum
Vuori states that he negotiated with Defendants concerning his role as an advisor for Grasshopper in California and that he performed most of his services as an advisor here. Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 2, 13. In his role as an advisor for Grasshopper, he also states that he facilitated many introductions to potential investors and financial institutions in California on behalf of Defendants. Vuori Decl. ¶¶ 3-6, 9. As also described above, Defendants negotiated with Vuori from New York and Ohio. Lewis Decl. ¶ 13; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 3. Because Vuori both negotiated with Defendants and performed his work for Grasshopper in this District, this factor slightly weighs against transfer.



h. The Differences in the Costs of Litigation in the Two Forums
As described above, Defendants have stressed that they will experience financial hardships associated with litigating this case in California. These costs include: (1) travel costs; (2) evidentiary costs, as Grasshopper's files, records, and documents are not located in California; [*69]  and (3) costs associated with hiring local counsel in California. Lewis Mot. Decl. ¶¶ 6, 8, 9; Rambhia Decl. ¶ 6.

This factor does not support transfer. In terms of travel costs, if Rambhia is required to appear for the present action, he will have to incur travel costs to appear at either forum. If the present action is transferred to the Eastern District of New York, Vuori will incur travel costs, which would do nothing more than "simply reduce [Lewis's] litigation costs while increasing [Vuori's] litigation costs. Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245880, at *5. As mentioned above, both parties have named potential witnesses within or at least somewhat near each district. As to evidentiary costs regarding Grasshopper's files, documents, and records, "the fact that records are located in a particular district is not sufficient to support a motion for transfer." Benson v. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Nos. C-09-5272, C-09-5560 (EMC), 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146020, 2010 WL 1445532, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 7, 2010) (quoting Royal Queentex, 2000 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10139, 2000 WL 246599, at *7). With respect to costs associated with hiring local counsel, Vuori would have to hire local counsel in New York, meaning that the burden "would merely shift" to Vuori "rather eliminate the inconvenience" entirely. Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245990, at *4 (quoting Costco Wholesale, 472 F. Supp. 2d at 1195). This factor is therefore effectively neutral.



i. Availability of Compulsory Process [*70] 
This factor weighs against transfer. As discussed above, the parties have identified potential non-party witnesses who are located in California, New York, and Canada. This Court would be able to compel the presence of potential witnesses Vuori has identified in the Bay Area because those witnesses reside or are employed within 100 miles of this Court. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 45. The non-party witnesses that Defendants have mentioned, however, are not subject to the same authority of the Eastern District of New York. Rhodes, who lives in Rochester, New York, is more than 100 miles away from the Eastern District, and is subject only to a limited subpoena power. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 45(c)(1)(B). Similarly, Matt Golden, who Defendants also mention as a potential non-party witness, lives in Toronto, Ontario, and is therefore not subject to compulsory process by the Eastern District of New York. See id.



j. Ease of Access to Sources of Proof
As discussed above, Defendants have stated that Grasshopper's documents, records, and files are not located in California. Defendants do not contend, however, that the relevant documents are so voluminous that it would be difficult for them to be transported as needed or transmitted in digital form. See [*71]  PRG-Schultz, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 42272, 2005 WL 2649206, at *5 (citation omitted); see also Hendricks, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41718, 2014 WL 1245880, at *5 ("[C]ourts have stated that the transportation of documents generally is not regarded as a burden because of technological advances in document storage and retrieval." (citations omitted)). At most, this factor favors transfer only slightly.

* * *

Many factors in the present case are neutral. Convenience to third party witnesses, Vuori's contacts with California, his choice of forum, and the Court's availability of compulsory process weigh against transfer, as well as perhaps the Court's familiarity with governing law. On the whole, the Court finds that the relevant factors weigh against transferring this case to the Eastern District of New York.



IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' motion to dismiss or transfer venue is DENIED.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: February 22, 2018

/s/ Joseph C. Spero

JOSEPH C. SPERO

Chief Magistrate Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The parties have consented to the jurisdiction of the undersigned magistrate judge pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(c).

2Link to the location of the note in the document
As discussed at the hearing, there are a number of options at the Court's disposal that might be appropriate to mitigate these issues.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
It is less clear that a substantial part of the events giving rise specifically to the Vuori's claims for misappropriation of likeness occurred here. Vuori does not specifically allege or present evidence that Rambhia and Lewis, as opposed to Vuori himself, used Vuori's likeness while they were in California or sent the slide deck containing his likeness to anyone in this District. The Court need not resolve that issue, however, because the close relationship between the misappropriation of likeness claims and the properly venued contract claims permits this Court to hear the former claims under the doctrine of pendant venue. See United Tactical, 108 F. Supp. 3d at 753.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
U.S. Dist. Courts—Combined Civ. & Crim. Fed. Ct. Mgmt. Statistics, http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics/table/na/federal-court-management-statistics/2017/09/30-1 (last visited Feb. 3, 2018).

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The events giving rise to Defendant's arrest and the underlying criminal complaint involve Defendant's alleged use of the "dark web" to facilitate international narcotics transactions. An extensive discussion of what, exactly, the dark web is and who uses it is unnecessary for purposes of this Report; stated as simply as possible, however, it is a means by which individuals use special programs to effectively "hide" their unique internet protocol ("IP") address and obtain two-way anonymity to conceal one's browsing activity. According to the Government, individuals utilize the two-way anonymity the dark web affords to create online marketplaces dedicated to various illicit activities, including the purchase and sale of controlled substances.

One of the websites being investigated by authorities is known as the "Dream Market." The website allows individuals to create online advertisements offering various narcotics for sale, to which other members can respond and seek to purchase the drugs for a price set by the offering member. Payment for the illicit purchases are made through the use of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, which add an additional [*3]  layer of anonymity to the transaction and conceal the identities of the accounts from which the cryptocurrency payments originate.

Vallerius came to the Government's attention because of his active role within the Dream Market. The Government alleges that Defendant frequented the site using the moniker "OxyMonster," where he was listed as a controlling administrator. The Government claims that Vallerius moderated the forums and provided advice to other members about the online drug trade. In connection with his role as a "senior moderator," Defendant also sold controlled substances to other members using the website, receiving payment for these sales through the use of a Bitcoin "tip jar," or electronic depository.

It was through this tip jar that law enforcement officials became aware of Vallerius' true identity. After locating the Bitcoin depository allegedly belonging to the user "OxyMonster," agents tracked several incoming payments and outgoing deposits from the tip jar to various "wallets" controlled by Vallerius. Agents also cross-checked posts made by OxyMonster on the Dream Market forum with social media accounts belonging to Vallerius. Authorities determined that the writing [*4]  style and syntax of the Dream Market posts made by OxyMonster matched those written by Defendant on his social media accounts and, equipped with this information, connected Defendant to his dark web persona.

Special Agent Lilita Infante of the United States Drug Enforcement Agency ("DEA") assisted in the investigation of Defendant's online activities and testified at the hearing in support of the Government's opposition to the Motion to Suppress. According to Infante, after the DEA linked the online persona of "OxyMonster" to Vallerius, she contacted members from Homeland Security Investigations ("HSI") to determine whether Vallerius might be travelling to the United States. HSI informed Infante that Defendant would be entering the country on August 31, 2017, roughly one week from the date she requested the information from HSI. Based on this information, Infante asked that Vallerius be "flagged" and pulled aside at the airport upon his arrival to customs.1Link to the text of the note

On August 31, 2017, Mr. Vallerius arrived in Atlanta from Paris, France on Delta Flight 83. Defendant entered the customs area and approached the "primary" inspector, who is tasked with examining passports and checking entrants' customs [*5]  forms. HSI Special Agent Stephen Lewis, the duty agent assigned to the airport at that time, instructed the primary inspector to notify Defendant he had been picked for secondary inspection in accordance with Agent Infante's request the week prior. The primary inspector referred Defendant to secondary inspection, which Lewis described as a "working area" that allows Custom and Border Patrol ("CBP") officers to conduct "more detailed and thorough" examinations of a passenger's bags. Defendant and his wife were then asked to remove their baggage from the secondary carousel and "claim ownership" of their belongings, which they did without issue.

The officers on scene then requested that the bags be opened, and Lewis asked if Vallerius had been traveling with any electronic devices. Defendant acknowledged he possessed a laptop computer, a cell phone, and an iPad tablet. Agent Lewis asked whether the electronic devices were password-protected and Defendant answered in the affirmative. Lewis told Defendant that he would need the passwords to the electronics because the devices were subject to routine inspection at the border. Lewis testified that he told Defendant that border patrol agents [*6]  would be searching for "contraband [and other] evidence of criminal activity," which included child pornography. According to Lewis, Defendant provided his passwords "without hesitation," and the electronic devices were removed from Defendant's possession. Lewis took the computer, tablet and phones to DEA agents from the Miami field office who were waiting in what he described as a "seizure room." The agents used the passwords to gain access to the computer and conduct a search of its contents. While this occurred, Lewis engaged in "small talk" with Defendant.

According to Lewis, the DEA agents notified him that they had found information on the laptop that linked Vallerius to the Dream Market.2Link to the text of the note Specifically, the agents located a Bitcoin "wallet" on the laptop that purportedly could be traced to the OxyMonster account. The agents on scene believed the wallet required a password, so Lewis returned and requested that information from Vallerius. Defendant informed Lewis that the wallet did not require a password.3Link to the text of the note Lewis then moved Vallerius to a conference room within his office, and informed Defendant that he was being placed under arrest.4Link to the text of the note Lewis and the DEA agents advised Defendant of his [*7]  Miranda rights and attempted to question him about the information obtained during the search of his laptop. Vallerius indicated he wished to consult with an attorney and at that point agents stopped the interview.

Based on the information obtained in the search of Defendant's computer in Atlanta, a search warrant was sought by prosecutors that would allow the agents to conduct a complete examination of Vallerius' computer. Magistrate Judge Jonathan Goodman granted the Government's request for a search warrant on September 1, 2017, after which a forensic examination of the computer took place. Defendant now argues that the initial questioning by Lewis, whereby he requested the computer password and cell phone personal identification codes, failed to comport with the Fifth Amendment, and that any information obtained as a result of that conversation should be suppressed. [D.E. 23]. Accordingly, Vallerius moves to suppress the contents and any information obtained from the search of his laptop computer, his cell phone and that of his wife and the contents of the tablet taken from his possession at the airport. Id.



II. ANALYSIS
Defendant's Motion raises two issues: first, whether Agent Lewis needed to [*8]  provide Miranda warnings before asking Vallerius for the passwords and personal identification codes necessary to open his laptop computer and cell phone; and second, whether the search of the computer for evidence of Vallerius' connection to the DEA's Dream Market investigation required a warrant. We address each of these arguments in turn.



A. The Fifth Amendment Did Not Require Agent Lewis to Administer Miranda Warnings
Defendant first argues that officers needed to provide Miranda warnings before asking him to provide his computer password and cell phone PIN code. We disagree.

The Fifth Amendment provides that "[n]o person...shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself." U.S. Const. amend. V. This guarantees that statements a defendant makes during custodial interrogations cannot be used against that defendant in court unless the government first advises the suspect of the constitutional rights set forth in Miranda. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 479, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966). A person is deemed to be in custody when, "under the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable man in the suspect's position would feel a restraint on his freedom of movement...to such extent that he would not feel free to leave." United States v. Phillips, 812 F.2d 1355, 1360 (11th Cir. 1987) (citations omitted). To be more specific, [*9]  the Supreme Court has said that whether a suspect is in custody turns on whether restriction on the suspect's freedom of movement are "of the degree associated with formal arrest." Minnesota v. Murphy, 465 U.S. 420, 430, 104 S. Ct. 1136, 79 L. Ed. 2d 409 (1984) (citations omitted). The test is an objective one; the subjective beliefs of the defendant and the interviewing officer are irrelevant. Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 442, 104 S. Ct. 3138, 82 L. Ed. 2d 317 (1984).

But in the case of those seeking entry to the United States, whether such a person can be considered "in custody" for purposes of Miranda "should be interpreted in light of the strong government interest in controlling [our nation's] borders." United States v. Moya, 74 F.3d 1117, 1119 (11th Cir. 1996); see also United States v. Lueck, 678 F.2d 895, 899 (11th Cir. 1982) ("Interrogation at the border constitutes one notable exception to the constitutional protection of Miranda."). "Because of the overriding power and responsibility of the sovereign to police international borders, the fifth amendment guarantee against self-incrimination is not offended by routine questioning of those seeking entry [into] the United States." Lueck, 678 F.2d at 899; cf. United States v. Vigil-Montanel, 753 F.2d 996, 998 (11th Cir. 1985) (discussing Lueck in airport-security context). Due to this responsibility, "some degree of questioning and delay is necessary and to be expected at entry points into the United States." Moya, 74 F.3d at 1120. As such, "questioning at the border must rise to a distinctly accusatory level before [*10]  it can be said that a reasonable person would feel restraints on his ability to roam and to the degree associated with formal arrest." Id.

The Eleventh Circuit's decision in Moya is instructive. In that case, the defendant arrived at Miami International Airport bearing a resident-alien card and a Dominican passport. Id. at 1118. A computer check on the resident-alien card indicated that the defendant may have been previously deported. Id. Border patrol agents referred the defendant to a secondary inspection area at customs, where he was questioned about his immigration status. Id. Moya told agents that he was entering the United States to see his family and denied having been deported, but he did admit admitted that he was not a United States citizen. Id.

Post-conviction, Moya moved to suppress the statements he gave at the airport, arguing that officers needed to provide Miranda warnings. The Eleventh Circuit disagreed. Stressing that "events which might be enough often to signal 'custody' away from the border will not be enough to establish 'custody' in the context of entry into the country," the Court found that Moya was not in custody at the time he answered questions about his immigration [*11]  status. Id. at 1119-1120. The Court based this decision on several factors: (1) Moya had not been moved or physically restrained by officers on the way to the scene of the interview; (2) handcuffs were not used on Moya prior to the interview; (3) officers did not have their guns drawn at the time the interview took place; (4) Moya was not booked, told of formal accusations, or told he was under arrest; and (5) Moya made no admissions during the interview that would have led a reasonable person to conclude that he would be arrested immediately. Id. at 1119.

Applying the same factors discussed in Moya to the case before us, we conclude that Vallerius was not in custody at the time he provided his password and PIN codes. Vallerius had not been restrained or moved at the time he answered the question posed by Agent Lewis. See United States v. Munoz-Gutierrez, 259 F. App'x 197, 200 (11th Cir. 2007) (finding that referral of a person entering the United States to a secondary inspector is part of the routine border interrogation and does not, in and of itself, require a Miranda warning) (citing Moya, 74 F.3d at 1120). Agent Lewis had not placed Defendant in handcuffs, no guns were drawn at the time Vallerius provided the information, and Defendant never asked to leave the secondary inspection area. See United States v. Medina, 167 F. App'x 161, 166 (11th Cir. 2006) (denying [*12]  motion to suppress based on Moya because officers did not restrain the suspect or tell him that he was under arrest, and defendant never asked to leave the interview). Under these circumstances, the officer's conduct had not rose to such a level that would cause a reasonable person to feel that his freedom was limited to the degree normally associated with formal arrest, and Miranda warnings were therefore not required. Moya, 74 F.3d at 1120.

We also find that the Motion should be denied because Agent Lewis' question could in no way be construed as sufficiently "accusatory" to transform the confrontation into a custodial interrogation. See id. In fact, not a single accusatory question was ever posed to Defendant. Lewis obtained the information at issue by asking Defendant a simple question, to which Vallerius responded without hesitation and of his own free will. Cf United States v. Jayyousi, 657 F.3d 1085, 1110-1111 (11th Cir. 2011) (border questioning became custodial when agent accused individual of training in al-Qaeda camp and participating in terrorist activities). Such a simple, straightforward question cannot and should not be deemed a custodial inquiry under the guidance provided by Moya.

Undeterred, Defendant contends that this case involves special circumstances, [*13]  and that the particular facts known to the DEA and HSI prior to the interview require us to look beyond the fact that the questions posed to Defendant took place at the border. According to Defendant's argument at the evidentiary hearing, Agent Lewis needed to provide Miranda warnings because the initial decision to pull him into secondary inspection was based entirely on the investigation into Vallerius' online activities and had nothing to do with Defendant's entry into this country. Defendant claims that if some form of "preexisting suspicion" exists at the time a suspect arrives at the border, Miranda warnings are required before any questions are asked.

We are not persuaded by this argument. In the first place, Defendant has not provided any authority to support such a broad proposition. Additionally, the Eleventh Circuit's decision in Jayyousi forecloses this argument. In that case, a suspect was under investigation for suspected links to terrorist groups at the time he arrived at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport. Jayyousi, 657 F.3d at 1094. The suspect failed to declare that he was traveling with more than $10,000 in his possession when he completed his entry forms, and was accordingly referred [*14]  to secondary inspection at the airport. Id. An FBI agent interviewed the suspect about his failure to accurately complete the customs form, but the discussion touched upon the defendant's international travel. Id. The agent also told the defendant that he wanted to gain the suspect's cooperation in order to help the FBI prevent future terrorist attacks against the United States from occurring. Id. at 1109. As the facts of that case show, at the time the interview took place, the FBI: (1) suspected that the defendant had ties to terrorist groups in Afghanistan; and (2) sought to obtain information about those ties during the airport interview. Id.

The Eleventh Circuit found that the initial interview did not require Miranda warnings because the suspect was not in custody at the time the questioning took place. Id., at 1110. More importantly, and for purposes of Defendant's argument about pretext, the Eleventh Circuit's decision makes clear that it made no difference that the suspect had been the subject of a prior FBI investigation. Instead, the Court focused exclusively on the circumstances surrounding the interrogation — not the fact that the suspect was being investigated for his links to terrorist organizations [*15]  — in order to determine whether the interrogation became custodial under Moya. Id. at 1109. The Court held that it had not, due to the fact that the suspect had not been restrained or handcuffed, and did not ask to leave the interrogation room at the time the FBI conducted its interview. Id.5Link to the text of the note

We must follow this reasoning and look to Agent Lewis's conduct at the time he requested Defendant's passwords, rather than the suspicions held by the DEA prior to the airport confrontation. As detailed above, Defendant was not in custody for Miranda purposes at the time Agent Lewis posed his question, as Vallerius had not been restrained or handcuffed, was not placed under arrest, and never asked to leave the secondary inspection area at any point after Agent Lewis requested the information. In accordance with Jayyousi and Moya, Agent Lewis did not need to provide Miranda warnings before asking for Vallerius' password and PIN codes, and the Motion to Suppress based on this argument should be denied. See id.



B. The Search of Defendant's Computer Did Not Violate the Fourth Amendment
Defendant also challenges the search of the computer that took place after he provided the password to Agent Lewis. Defendant [*16]  claims that the consent to search the computer was not knowing and voluntary because that consent "was given based on false information and deception." [D.E. 23, p. 12]. For purposes of the Fourth Amendment, however, Vallerius consent is irrelevant.

The Fourth Amendment guarantees "[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, and shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause." U.S. Const. Amend. IV. But searches at the border, "from before the adoption of the Fourth Amendment, have been considered to be 'reasonable' by the single fact that the person or item in question had entered our country from outside." United States v. Ramsey, 431 U.S. 606, 619, 97 S. Ct. 1972, 52 L. Ed. 2d 617 (1977). Border searches never require probable cause or a warrant, id., and reasonable suspicion is only required "for highly intrusive searches of a person's body," such as strip searches or x-ray examinations. United States v. Alfaro-Moncada, 607 F.3d 720, 729 (11th Cir. 2010); see also United States v. Santiago, 837 F.2d 1545, 1548 (11th Cir. 1988) (finding that a secondary customs search following the initial inspection is proper even absent reasonable suspicion of criminal activity).

As an initial matter, we find that Defendant's consent was knowing and voluntary, as the record makes clear that Vallerius answered the question posed by Agent Lewis of his own free [*17]  will. See United States v. Garcia, 890 F.2d 355, 360 (11th Cir. 1989) ("In order for consent to a search to be deemed voluntary, it must be the product of an essentially free and unconstrained choice."). Nevertheless, we hold that Defendant's consent is unnecessary because Agent Lewis did not need to obtain any consent in order to conduct a search of Vallerius' belongings, including his computer. See United States v. Vergara, 884 F.3d 1309, 1312-13 (11th Cir. 2018) (forensic examination of defendant's cell phones after disembarking from cruise ship did not require search warrant or probable cause to comply with Fourth Amendment's reasonableness requirement); United States v. Kandhai, 629 F. App'x 850, 851 (11th Cir. 2015) (customs agents at airport did not need a warrant to search defendant's suitcase for suspected narcotics, after it had arrived on international flight, because the search was conducted at the functional equivalent of the border). Here, agents possessed independent authority to search the electronic devices for evidence of criminal activity or contraband as a result of the border search doctrine, and therefore consent is immaterial. See Vergara, 884 F.3d at 1312. Accordingly, we find this argument to be without merit.6Link to the text of the note

Defendant's claim that the search took place in a concerted effort to confirm his connection to the Dream Market investigation is likewise ineffective. We are persuaded by the Second [*18]  Circuit's decision in United States v. Irving, whereby a defendant moving to suppress evidence under similar circumstances advanced the same argument set forth by Defendant here. See United States v. Irving, 452 F.3d 110 (2d Cir. 2006). Specifically, the movant in Irving sought to suppress statements made to and evidence obtained by federal agents during a routine border search, arguing that the search took place as a pretext to obtain information related to a different criminal investigation involving the defendant. Id. at 115. The Second Circuit rejected this argument, finding that "[i]n the case of searches at airports, it would make little sense to allow random searches of any incoming passenger, without reasonable suspicion, but require reasonable suspicion for searches of passengers that are suspected of criminal activity." Id. at 123 (citations omitted). "From this we reason that the validity of a border search does not depend on whether it is prompted by a criminal investigative motive." Id.

Based on Irving, and in light of the Government's interest in controlling the nation's borders, it stands to reason that a search of an individual's belongings at an airport is unaffected by the fact that the search is prompted by other law enforcement agents [*19]  or an investigative motive. See generally United States v. Schoor, 597 F.2d 1303, 1306 (9th Cir. 1979) (Kennedy, J.) ("That the search was made at the request of the DEA officers does not detract from its legitimacy. Suspicion of customs officials is alone sufficient justification for a border search[, and] [t]he source of that suspicion is irrelevant in sustaining the search.") (citations omitted); United States v. Levy, 803 F.3d 120, 123 (2d Cir. 2015) ("We also conclude that the CBP officer was entitled to rely on information provided by the DEA task force to justify the border search in this case...Whether a Customs official's reasonable suspicion arises entirely from her own investigation or is prompted by another federal agency is irrelevant to the validity of a border search[.]"). It would not make sense for us to allow any passenger to be searched at the border without reasonable suspicion, but to make exceptions for those suspected of criminal activity prior to their arrival into the United States. As such, the subjective intent of what officers hoped to gain by conducting the search does not make a difference. Irving, 452 F.3d at 123 ("As pretext should not determine the validity of a border search, it also should not determine whether a border search is routine (meaning it does not require reasonable suspicion)."). [*20] 

We therefore conclude that the information obtained from Defendant's computer was done so with his consent — even though such consent was unnecessary — and did not require a warrant despite the previous investigation into Defendant's online activities. Accordingly, the search warrant obtained by prosecutors following the search of the computer at the airport is in no way "tainted" by the initial search, and should be upheld as valid and enforceable under the Fourth Amendment.



III. CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, it is hereby RECOMMENDED that Defendant's Motion to Suppress be DENIED. Pursuant to Local Magistrate Rule 4(b), the Parties shall have fourteen (14) days to file written objections, if any, with the Honorable Robert N. Scola, United States District Judge. Failure to timely file objections shall bar the parties from de novo determination by the District Judge of any factual or legal issue covered in the Report and shall bar the parties from challenging on appeal the District Judge's Order based on any unobjected-to factual or legal conclusions included in the Report. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); 11th Cir. Rule 3-1; see, e.g., Patton v. Rowell, 678 Fed. Appx. 898, 2017 WL 443634 (11th Cir. 2017); Cooley v. Commissioner of Social Security, 671 Fed. Appx. 767, 2016 WL 7321208 (11th Cir. 2016).

DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at Miami, Florida this 1st day of May, 2018.

/s/ Edwin G. Torres

EDWIN G. TORRES

United States [*21]  Magistrate Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Infante stated that she did not know what Vallerius would be carrying with him, but testified that in her experience users of the dark web often conduct their business on personal laptop computers. Thus, she hoped that a search of Defendant's belongings upon his entry into the country might reveal additional links between Vallerius to his suspected Dream Market activities.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
During this time, the DEA agents continued to speak with federal prosecutors in Miami, Florida over the telephone about the status of the search and the examination of the computer's contents.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Lewis eventually learned that the Bitcoin wallet contained approximately $500,000. He does not know how agents became aware of this figure.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Agent Lewis testified that his office was located within the secondary inspection area, but in a more remote location of the terminal.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
The Eleventh Circuit did, ultimately, find that the latter portion of the interview was custodial in nature and required Miranda warnings. See Jayyousi, 657 F.3d at 1110-1111. But this does not change our ultimate finding that Miranda warnings were unnecessary, as the Court's decision in Jayyousi centered on the fact that the FBI agent conducting the interview accused the suspect of engaging in terrorist activities during the second interview and "a reasonable person would have felt subjected to a degree of restraint comparable to arrest." Id. at 1110. We do not have such a scenario here, as the only question asked of Defendant concerned his password and PIN codes, and no accusations were ever made.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant also claims that any consent given was involuntary because he was "under the influence of narcotics" at the time he provided such consent. [D.E. 23, p. 11]. Even if we determined that consent was necessary — which we do not — Defendant provided no evidence whatsoever that this was indeed the case, and we therefore reject this argument outright.

Case Summary


Overview
HOLDINGS: [1]-The issuance of the pen/trap orders under 18 U.S.C.S. § 3122(a)(1) that the government used to monitor IP address traffic to and from defendant's home router did not violate the Fourth Amendment because defendant had no reasonable expectation of privacy in the IP address routing information that the orders allowed the government to collect; [2]-The warrants authorizing the government to search defendant's laptop as well as his electronic media accounts did not violate the Fourth Amendment's particularity requirement because the warrants listed the charged crimes, described the places to be searched, and designated the information to be seized in connection with the specified offenses; [3]-Defendant had not shown that the district court abused its discretion in maintaining secrecy of grand jury investigation.

Outcome
Judgment affirmed.


Hide sectionLexisNexis® Headnotes


Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of Review > De Novo Review > Conclusions of Law
View more legal topics
HN1  De Novo Review, Conclusions of Law
On appeal from a denial of a suppression motion, the appellate court reviews a district court's findings of fact for clear error, and its resolution of questions of law and mixed questions of law and fact de novo. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Eavesdropping, Electronic Surveillance & Wiretapping > Pen Registers & Trap & Trace Devices
HN2  Eavesdropping, Electronic Surveillance & Wiretapping, Pen Registers & Trap & Trace Devices
The Pen/Trap Act provides that a government attorney may make an application for an order authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace device to a court of competent jurisdiction. 18 U.S.C.S. § 3122(a)(1). A pen register is defined as a device or process which records or decodes dialing, routing, addressing, or signaling information transmitted by an instrument or facility from which a wire or electronic communication is transmitted, and shall not include the contents of any communication. § 3127(3). A trap and trace device means a device or process which captures the incoming electronic or other impulses which identify the originating number or other dialing, routing, addressing, and signaling information reasonably likely to identify the source of a wire or electronic communication. § 3127(4). Like pen registers, trap and trace devices may not capture the contents of any communication. Id. The statute does not require a search warrant for the use of a pen register or trap and trace device, nor does it demand the kind of showing required to obtain such a warrant. Rather, the statute requires only that the application contain a certification that the information likely to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation. § 3122(b)(2). More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (7)Positive: CaselawPositive4

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Scope of Protection
HN3  Search & Seizure, Scope of Protection
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that: The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. The cornerstone of the modern law of searches is the principle that, to mount a successful Fourth Amendment challenge, a defendant must demonstrate that he personally has an expectation of privacy in the place searched. Thus, a Fourth Amendment search' does not occur unless the search invades an object or area in which one has a subjective expectation of privacy that society is prepared to accept as objectively reasonable. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (7)Positive: CaselawPositive2

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
View more legal topics
HN4  Search & Seizure, Expectation of Privacy
A person has no legitimate expectation of privacy in information he voluntarily turns over to third parties, including phone numbers dialed in making a telephone call and captured by a pen register. This is so because phone users typically know that they must convey numerical information to the phone company; that the phone company has facilities for recording this information; and that the phone company does in fact record this information for a variety of legitimate business purposes. Similarly, e-mail and Internet users rely on third-party equipment in order to engage in communication. Internet users thus should know that this information is provided to and used by Internet service providers for the specific purpose of directing the routing of information. Moreover, IP addresses are not merely passively conveyed through third party equipment, but rather are voluntarily turned over in order to direct the third party's servers. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (11)Positive: CaselawPositive5

Governments > Courts > Judicial Precedent
HN5  Courts, Judicial Precedent
Appellate courts remain bound by a rule until and unless it is overruled by the United States Supreme Court. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
View more legal topics
HN6  Search & Seizure, Expectation of Privacy
Collecting IP address information devoid of content is constitutionally indistinguishable from the use of a pen register. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (8)Positive: CaselawPositive5

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
HN7  Search & Seizure, Expectation of Privacy
A defendant cannot claim a reasonable expectation of privacy in the government's acquisition of his subscriber information, including his IP address and name, because it had been revealed to a third party. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (8)Positive: CaselawPositive4

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
HN8  Search & Seizure, Expectation of Privacy
There is no expectation of privacy in subscriber information provided to an internet provider, such as an IP address. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (4)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
HN9  Search & Seizure, Expectation of Privacy
Computer users do not have a legitimate expectation of privacy in their bulletin board subscriber information because they have conveyed it to another person. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Scope of Protection
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
HN10  Search & Seizure, Scope of Protection
Third-party information relating to the sending and routing of electronic communications does not receive Fourth Amendment protection. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Scope of Protection
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Expectation of Privacy
HN11  Search & Seizure, Scope of Protection
Courts have not extended Fourth Amendment protections to the internet analogue to envelope markings, namely the metadata used to route internet communications, like IP addresses. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
View more legal topics
HN12  Search & Seizure, Warrants
The Fourth Amendment explicitly commands that warrants must be based on probable cause and must particularly describe the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. U.S. Const. amend. IV. It is familiar history that indiscriminate searches and seizures conducted under the authority of general warrants' were the immediate evils that motivated the framing and adoption of the Fourth Amendment. Those general warrants specified only an offense, leaving to the discretion of the executing officials the decision as to which persons should be arrested and which places should be searched. The principal defect in such a warrant was that it permitted a general, exploratory rummaging in a person's belongings, a problem that the Fourth Amendment attempted to resolve by requiring the warrant to set out with particularity the scope of the authorized search. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN13  Search & Seizure, Warrants
In addition to preventing general searches, the particularity requirement serves two other purposes not relevant to this appeal: preventing the seizure of objects upon the mistaken assumption that they fall within the magistrate's authorization, and preventing the issuance of warrants without a substantial factual basis. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN14  Search & Seizure, Warrants
To be sufficiently particular under the Fourth Amendment, a warrant must satisfy three requirements. First, a warrant must identify the specific offense for which the police have established probable cause. Second, a warrant must describe the place to be searched. Finally, the warrant must specify the items to be seized by their relation to designated crimes. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (3)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN15  Search & Seizure, Warrants
Where the property to be searched is a computer hard drive, the particularity requirement assumes even greater importance. A general search of electronic data is an especially potent threat to privacy because hard drives and e-mail accounts may be akin to a residence in terms of the scope and quantity of private information they may contain. The seizure of a computer hard drive, and its subsequent retention by the government, can therefore give the government possession of a vast trove of personal information about the person to whom the drive belongs, much of which may be entirely irrelevant to the criminal investigation that led to the seizure. Such sensitive records might include tax records, diaries, personal photographs, electronic books, electronic media, medical data, records of internet searches, and banking and shopping information. Because of the nature of digital storage, it is not always feasible to extract and segregate responsive data from non-responsive data, creating a serious risk that every warrant for electronic information will become, in effect, a general warrant, Thus, warrants that fail to link the evidence sought to the criminal activity supported by probable cause do not satisfy the particularity requirement because they lack meaningful parameters on an otherwise limitless search of a defendant's electronic media. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (6)Positive: CaselawPositive3

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN16  Search & Seizure, Warrants
The Fourth Amendment does not require a perfect description of the data to be searched and seized, however. Search warrants covering digital data may contain some ambiguity so long as law enforcement agents have done the best that could reasonably be expected under the circumstances, have acquired all the descriptive facts which a reasonable investigation could be expected to cover, and have insured that all those facts were included in the warrant. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN17  Search & Seizure, Warrants
A search warrant does not necessarily lack particularity simply because it is broad. Since a search of a computer is akin to a search of a residence, searches of computers may sometimes need to be as broad as searches of residences pursuant to warrants. Similarly, traditional searches for paper records, like searches for electronic records, have always entailed the exposure of records that are not the objects of the search to at least superficial examination in order to identify and seize those records that are. And in many cases, the volume of records properly subject to seizure because of their evidentiary value may be vast. None of these consequences necessarily turns a search warrant into a prohibited general warrant. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN18  Search & Seizure, Warrants
Breadth and particularity are related but distinct concepts. A warrant may be broad, in that it authorizes the government to search an identified location or object for a wide range of potentially relevant material, without violating the particularity requirement. For example, a warrant may allow the government to search a suspected drug dealer's entire home where there is probable cause to believe that evidence relevant to that activity may be found anywhere in the residence. Similarly, when the criminal activity pervades an entire business, seizure of all records of the business is appropriate, and broad language used in warrants will not offend the particularity requirements. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (5)Positive: CaselawPositive3

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Warrants
Criminal Law & Procedure > Search & Seizure > Search Warrants > Particularity Requirement
HN19  Search & Seizure, Warrants
An invasion of a criminal defendant's privacy is inevitable in almost any warranted search because in searches for papers, it is certain that some innocuous documents will be examined, at least cursorily, in order to determine whether they are, in fact, among those papers authorized to be seized. The Fourth Amendment limits such unwarranted intrusions upon privacy, by requiring a warrant to describe its scope with particularity. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Search & Seizure > Exclusionary Rule
Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Exclusionary Rule > Exceptions to Exclusionary Rule > Reasonable Reliance Upon Warrant
HN20  Search & Seizure, Exclusionary Rule
The exclusion of evidence is inappropriate when the government acts in objectively reasonable reliance on a search warrant, even when the warrant is subsequently invalidated. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Secrecy > Disclosure > Judicial Proceedings
HN21  Disclosure, Judicial Proceedings
Grand jury proceedings are secret and a government attorney must not disclose a matter occurring before the grand jury, Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e)(2)(B)(vi), without a court order, Rule 6(e)(3)(E), subject to limited exceptions. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Commencement of Criminal Proceedings > Grand Juries > Secrecy
HN22  Grand Juries, Secrecy
The proper functioning of the grand jury system depends upon the secrecy of grand jury proceedings. There are five rationales for such secrecy: (1) to prevent the escape of those whose indictment may be contemplated; (2) to insure the utmost freedom to the grand jury in its deliberations, and to prevent persons subject to indictment or their friends from importuning the grand jurors; (3) to prevent subornation of perjury or tampering with the witnesses who may testify before the grand jury and later appear at the trial of those indicted by it; (4) to encourage free and untrammeled disclosures by persons who have information with respect to the commission of crimes; (5) to protect the innocent accused who is exonerated from disclosure of the fact that he has been under investigation, and from the expense of standing trial where there was no probability of guilt. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Secrecy > Disclosure > Judicial Proceedings
HN23  Disclosure, Judicial Proceedings
Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e)(6) implements this policy of secrecy by requiring that all records, orders, and subpoenas relating to grand jury proceedings must be sealed. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Secrecy > Disclosure > Judicial Discretion
View more legal topics
HN24  Disclosure, Judicial Discretion
Information falling within Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e)'s protections is entitled to a presumption of secrecy and closure. To rebut the presumption of secrecy, the party seeking disclosure must show a particularized need that outweighs the need for secrecy. To prove a particularized need, parties seeking disclosure must show that the material they seek is needed to avoid a possible injustice in another judicial proceeding, that the need for disclosure is greater than the need for continued secrecy, and that their request is structured to cover only material so needed. A district court's decision as to whether the burden of showing a particularized interest has been met will be overturned only if the court has abused its discretion. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Preliminary Proceedings > Discovery & Inspection > Discovery by Defendant
HN25  Discovery & Inspection, Discovery by Defendant
Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(a)(1)(E) requires the government to disclose information within its control if the information is material to preparing the defense or will be a part of the government's case-in-chief. Evidence is material if it could be used to counter the government's case or to bolster a defense. An appellate court, in assessing the materiality of withheld information, considers not only the logical relationship between the information and the issues in the case, but also the importance of the information in light of the evidence as a whole. To justify a new trial, there must be some indication that the pretrial disclosure of the disputed evidence would have enabled the defendant significantly to alter the quantum of proof in his favor. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (2)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Witnesses > Subpoenas > Discovery
View more legal topics
HN26  Subpoenas, Discovery
Fed. R. Crim. P. 17(c) allows parties to subpoena documents and objects to be introduced at criminal trials. A subpoena must meet three criteria: (1) relevancy; (2) admissibility; and (3) specificity. The party requesting the subpoena must also show that the information sought is not otherwise procurable reasonably in advance of trial by exercise of due diligence, that the party cannot properly prepare for trial without such production, and that the application is made in good faith and is not intended as a general fishing expedition. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion > Discovery
HN27  Abuse of Discretion, Discovery
The appellate court reviews the district court's discovery rulings for abuse of discretion. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Continuances
HN28  Trials, Continuances
A district court has a great deal of latitude in scheduling trials. Thus, trial courts enjoy very broad discretion in granting or denying trial continuances. A decision to grant or deny a request for an adjournment is reviewed for abuse of discretion, and courts will find no such abuse unless the denial was an arbitrary action that substantially impaired the defense. Thus, the party seeking a continuance has the burden of showing both arbitrariness and prejudice in order to obtain reversal based on a denial of an adjournment. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > ... > Statements as Evidence > Hearsay > Rule Components
HN29  Hearsay, Rule Components
Hearsay is not admissible unless an exception applies. Fed. R. Evid. 802. The Federal Rules of Evidence define hearsay as a declarant's out-of-court statement offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted in the statement. If the significance of an offered statement lies solely in the fact that it was made, no issue is raised as to the truth of anything asserted, and the statement is not hearsay. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion > Evidence
HN30  Abuse of Discretion, Evidence
The trial court's ultimate decisions as to the admission or exclusion of evidence are reviewed for abuse of discretion. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Postconviction Proceedings > Motions for New Trial
View more legal topics
HN31  Postconviction Proceedings, Motions for New Trial
Fed. R. Crim. P. 33(a) provides that, on the defendant's motion, the court may vacate any judgment and grant a new trial if the interest of justice so requires. District courts have been advised to exercise Rule 33 authority sparingly and in the most extraordinary circumstances. Where a defendant's Brady claim was raised in a motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule 33, the appellate court reviews the denial of the motion for abuse of discretion. In the context of denying a Rule 33 motion, a district court abuses the discretion accorded to it when (1) its decision rests on an error of law or a clearly erroneous factual finding, or (2) its decision, though not necessarily the product of a legal error or a clearly erroneous factual finding, cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Discovery & Inspection > Brady Materials > Brady Claims
HN32  Brady Materials, Brady Claims
There are three components of a Brady violation: (1) The evidence at issue must be favorable to the accused, either because it is exculpatory or because it is impeaching; (2) that evidence must have been suppressed by the government, either willfully or inadvertently; and (3) prejudice must have ensued. Information is exculpatory if it relates to the defendant's guilt or innocence. In order to show that he has been prejudiced, a defendant must demonstrate a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would have been different, such that the failure to disclose undermines confidence in the verdict. Thus, the prosecution must disclose exculpatory and impeachment information no later than the point at which a reasonable probability will exist that the outcome would have been different if an earlier disclosure had been made. In general, a prudent prosecutor will err on the side of transparency, resolving doubtful questions in favor of disclosure. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (2)Positive: CaselawPositive2

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Duty of Disclosure > Witness Lists > Defense Witnesses
HN33  Witness Lists, Defense Witnesses
In general, the defendant must, at the government's request, give to the government a written summary of any expert testimony that a defendant intends to use. This summary must describe the witness's opinions, the bases and reasons for those opinions, and the witness's qualifications. Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(b)(1)(C). The purpose of the expert disclosure requirement is to minimize surprise that often results from unexpected expert testimony, reduce the need for continuances, and to provide the opponent with a fair opportunity to test the merit of the expert's testimony through focused cross-examination. Fed. R. Crim. P. 16, advisory committee's note. Indeed, with increased use of both scientific and nonscientific expert testimony, one of counsel's most basic discovery needs is to learn that an expert is expected to testify. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Duty of Disclosure > Witness Lists > Appellate Review & Judicial Discretion
View more legal topics
HN34  Witness Lists, Appellate Review & Judicial Discretion
If a party fails to comply with Fed. R. Crim. P. 16, the district court has broad discretion in fashioning a remedy, which may include granting a continuance or ordering the exclusion of evidence. Rule 16(d)(2)(A)-(D) provides that a district court may order any other remedy that is just under the circumstances. The appellate court thus reviews the district court's choice of remedy for abuse of discretion. In considering whether the district court abused its discretion, the appellate court looks to the reasons why disclosure was not made, the extent of the prejudice, if any, to the opposing party, the feasibility of rectifying that prejudice by a continuance, and any other relevant circumstances. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (2)

Evidence > Admissibility > Expert Witnesses > Daubert Standard
HN35  Expert Witnesses, Daubert Standard
Daubert requires the district court to make a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or methodology underlying the expert testimony is scientifically valid and can be applied to the facts in issue. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > Admissibility > Expert Witnesses > Daubert Standard
HN36  Expert Witnesses, Daubert Standard
A Daubert reliability assessment requires a district court to consider the extent to which the expert's theory has been subjected to peer review and publication, whether the technique is subject to standards controlling the technique's operation, the known or potential rate of error, and the degree of acceptance within the relevant scientific community. That inquiry is a flexible one, however, and Daubert is not a definitive checklist or test for the reliability of expert testimony. Thus, whether Daubert's specific factors are, or are not, reasonable measures of reliability in a particular case is a matter that the law grants the trial judge broad latitude to determine. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Discovery & Inspection > Brady Materials > Duty of Disclosure
HN37  Brady Materials, Duty of Disclosure
Careful consideration of a range of possible sanctions short of preclusion is especially important in the atypical case where a criminal defendant, rather than the government, is precluded from putting on his case because of a Fed. R. Crim. P. 16 violation. Limiting the defense's presentation of his case implicates the fundamental right of an accused to present witnesses in his own defense. However, the defendant must still comply with established rules of procedure and evidence designed to assure both fairness and reliability in the ascertainment of guilt and innocence. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion > Evidence
HN38  Abuse of Discretion, Evidence
The appellate court reviews a trial court's decision to limit the scope of cross-examination for abuse of discretion. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Criminal Process > Right to Confrontation
Evidence > ... > Examination > Cross-Examinations > Scope
Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Defendant's Rights > Right to Confrontation
HN39  Criminal Process, Right to Confrontation
A district court is accorded broad discretion in controlling the scope and extent of cross-examination. Fed. R. Evid. 611(a). Thus, a district court may impose reasonable limits on cross-examination to protect against, e.g., harassment, prejudice, confusion, and waste. In general, however, a district court should afford wide latitude to a defendant in a criminal case to cross-examine government witnesses. That is so because the Confrontation Clause gives a defendant the right not only to cross-examination, but to effective cross-examination. It does not follow, of course, that the Confrontation Clause prevents a trial judge from imposing any limits on defense counsel's cross-examination of government witnesses. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Witnesses > Presentation
View more legal topics
HN40  Witnesses, Presentation
In order to elicit testimony implicating an alternative perpetrator, a defendant must show that his proffered evidence on the alleged alternative perpetrator is sufficient, on its own or in combination with other evidence in the record, to show a nexus between the crime charged and the asserted alternative perpetrator. Thus, to avoid a grave risk of jury confusion, a defendant must offer more than unsupported speculation that another person may have done the crime. An agent's state of mind as the investigation progressed is ordinarily of little or no relevance to the question of the defendant's guilt. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > ... > Procedural Matters > Objections & Offers of Proof > Objections
View more legal topics
HN41  Objections & Offers of Proof, Objections
An objection should be made after the question has been asked but before an answer has been given. That rule is not inflexible, however, and courts do not necessarily find an objection affirmatively waived because it might have been interposed a few questions earlier. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > ... > Examination > Cross-Examinations > Scope
HN42  Examination, Cross-Examinations
Once any direct examination is concluded, cross-examination within the scope of the direct follows. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > ... > Statements as Evidence > Hearsay > Hearsay Within Hearsay
HN43  Hearsay, Hearsay Within Hearsay
When confronted with hearsay within hearsay, or double hearsay, courts must determine that each part of the combined statement is independently admissible. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion > Evidence
HN44  Abuse of Discretion, Evidence
A district court's ultimate decisions as to the admission or exclusion of evidence are reviewed for abuse of discretion, and will not be disturbed unless they are manifestly erroneous. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)

Evidence > ... > Hearsay > Exceptions > Statements Against Interest
HN45  Exceptions, Statements Against Interest
To invoke the Fed. R. Evid. 804(b)(3) exception for a statement against interest, the proponent of the statement must show (1) that the declarant is unavailable as a witness, (2) that the statement is sufficiently reliable to warrant an inference that a reasonable man in the declarant's position would not have made the statement unless he believed it to be true, and (3) that corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement. The exception applies only if the district court determines that a reasonable person in the declarant's shoes would perceive the statement as detrimental to his or her own penal interest. The key to this inquiry is whether the statement is sufficiently self-inculpatory, which the district court must evaluate on a case-by-case basis. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Procedural Due Process > Self-Incrimination Privilege
HN46  Procedural Due Process, Self-Incrimination Privilege
In the Fifth Amendment context, there can be a legitimate fear of adverse consequences from further testimony where a sentence has not yet been imposed. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Evidence > ... > Hearsay > Exceptions > Residual Exception
HN47  Exceptions, Residual Exception
Fed. R. Evid. 807 provides for a limited, residual exception to the rule against hearsay where no other exception applies. A hearsay statement may be admissible under Rule 807 if: (i) it is particularly trustworthy; (ii) it bears on a material fact; (iii) it is the most probative evidence addressing that fact; (iv) its admission is consistent with the rules of evidence and advances the interests of justice; and (v) its proffer follows adequate notice to the adverse party. The residual hearsay exception will be used very rarely, and only in exceptional circumstances. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Appeals > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion
View more legal topics
HN48  Standards of Review, Abuse of Discretion
A district court has broad latitude to impose either a United States Sentencing Guidelines sentence or a non-Guidelines sentence. Accordingly, the role of the court of appeals is limited to examining a sentence for reasonableness, which is akin to review under an abuse-of-discretion' standard. This standard applies both to the substantive reasonableness of the sentence itself and to the procedures employed in arriving at the sentence. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Sentencing > Imposition of Sentence > Factors
View more legal topics
HN49  Imposition of Sentence, Factors
A sentence is procedurally unreasonable if the district court fails to calculate (or improperly calculates) the Sentencing Guidelines range, treats the Sentencing Guidelines as mandatory, fails to consider the 18 U.S.C.S. § 3553(a) factors, selects a sentence based on clearly erroneous facts, or fails adequately to explain the chosen sentence. To hold that a factual finding is clearly erroneous, the court must be left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. Where there are two permissible views of the evidence, the factfinder's choice between them cannot be clearly erroneous. In general, a sentencing court has discretion to consider a wide range of information in arriving at an appropriate sentence. The district court's factual findings at sentencing need be supported only by a preponderance of the evidence. Where the appellate court identifies procedural error in a sentence, but the record indicates clearly that the district court would have imposed the same sentence in any event, the error may be deemed harmless, avoiding the need to vacate the sentence and to remand the case for resentencing. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (1)Positive: CaselawPositive1

Civil Procedure > Appeals > Amicus Curiae
HN50  Appeals, Amicus Curiae
The court is not required to address arguments raised only by an amicus. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Constitutional Law > ... > Fundamental Rights > Criminal Process > Right to Jury Trial
Criminal Law & Procedure > Sentencing > Imposition of Sentence > Factors
HN51  Criminal Process, Right to Jury Trial
A district court may consider as part of its sentencing determination uncharged conduct proven by a preponderance of the evidence as long as that conduct does not increase either the statutory minimum or maximum available punishment. Broad sentencing discretion, informed by judicial factfinding, does not violate the Sixth Amendment. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (2)Positive: CaselawPositive2

Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Appeals > Standards of Review > Abuse of Discretion
HN52  Standards of Review, Abuse of Discretion
The appellate court will set aside a district court's substantive sentencing determination only in exceptional cases where the trial court's decision cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions. The appellate court's review is deferential, and it does not consider what weight it would have given a particular factor. Rather, the appellate court considers whether the factor, as explained by the district court, can bear the weight assigned it under the totality of the circumstances in the case. The appellate court's role in patrolling the boundaries of reasonableness is modest. Accordingly, the appellate court will set aside only those outlier sentences that reflect actual abuse of a district court's considerable sentencing discretion. More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Sentencing > Imposition of Sentence > Factors
View more legal topics
HN53  Imposition of Sentence, Factors
That the sentence imposed accorded with the United States Sentencing Guidelines recommendation does not automatically render it reasonable. The Guidelines are, however, themselves a factor that Congress has directed district courts to consider. 18 U.S.C.S. § 3553(a)(4)(A). Moreover, as the considered judgment of the United States Sentencing Commission, they bear on the other factors that Congress has required courts to evaluate, including the need to reflect the seriousness of the offense, § 3553(a)(2)(A), to provide adequate deterrence, § 3553(a)(2)(B), and, because they are considered by all judges throughout the federal system, the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct, § 3553(a)(6). More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)

Criminal Law & Procedure > Sentencing > Imposition of Sentence > Factors
HN54  Imposition of Sentence, Factors
The ability of a sentence to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct is a factor that district courts are required by Congress to consider in arriving at the appropriate sentence. 18 U.S.C.S. § 3553(a)(2)(B) More like this Headnote

Shepardize - Narrow by this Headnote (0)


Counsel: JOSHUA L. DRATEL, Joshua L. Dratel, P.C., New York, NY, for defendant-appellant Ross William Ulbricht.

EUN YOUNG CHOI, Assistant United States Attorney (Michael D. Neff, Timothy T. Howard, Adam S. Hickey, Assistant United States Attorneys, on the brief), for Preet Bharara, United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, New York, NY.

Tamar Todd, Jolene Forman, Drug Policy Alliance, Oakland, CA, for amici curiae Drug [**2]  Policy Alliance, Law Enforcement Against Prohibition, JustLeadershipUSA, and Nancy Gertner.

Joel B. Rudin, Law Offices of Joel B. Rudin, P.C., New York, NY; Steven R. Morrison, University of North Dakota School of Law, Grand Forks, ND, for amicus curiae National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.

Judges: Before: NEWMAN, LYNCH, and DRONEY, Circuit Judges.

Opinion by: GERARD E. LYNCH

Opinion
 [*82]  Gerard E. Lynch, Circuit Judge:

Defendant Ross William Ulbricht appeals from a judgment of conviction and sentence to life imprisonment entered in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York (Katherine B. Forrest, J.). A jury convicted Ulbricht of drug trafficking and other crimes associated with his creation and operation of Silk Road, an online marketplace whose users primarily purchased and sold illegal goods and services. He challenges several aspects of his conviction and sentence, arguing that (1) the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence assertedly obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment; (2) the district court committed numerous errors that deprived him of his right to a fair trial, and incorrectly denied his motion for a new trial; and (3) his life sentence is both procedurally [**3]  and substantively unreasonable. Because we identify no reversible error, we AFFIRM Ulbricht's conviction and sentence in all respects.



BACKGROUND
In February 2015, a jury convicted Ross William Ulbricht on seven counts arising from his creation and operation of Silk Road under the username Dread Pirate Roberts ("DPR").1Link to the text of the note Silk Road was a massive, anonymous criminal marketplace that operated using the Tor Network, which renders Internet traffic through the Tor browser extremely difficult to trace.2Link to the text of the note Silk Road users principally bought and sold drugs, false identification documents, and computer hacking software. Transactions on Silk Road exclusively used Bitcoins, an  [*83]  anonymous but traceable digital currency.3Link to the text of the note The site also contained a private message system, which allowed users to send messages to each other (similar to communicating via email), a public forum to discuss topics related to Silk Road, and a "wiki," which is like an encyclopedia that users could access to receive advice about using the site. Silk Road customers and vendors could also access a support section of the website to seek help from the marketplace's administrators when an issue arose.

According to the government, between [**4]  2011 and 2013, thousands of vendors used Silk Road to sell approximately $183 million worth of illegal drugs, as well as other goods and services. Ulbricht, acting as DPR, earned millions of dollars in profits from the commissions collected by Silk Road on purchases. In October 2013, the government arrested Ulbricht, seized the Silk Road servers, and shut down the site.



I. Silk Road Investigation
After Ulbricht created Silk Road in 2011, the site attracted the interest of at least two separate divisions of the Department of Justice:4Link to the text of the note the United States Attorney's Offices for the District of Maryland and for the Southern District of New York. Throughout the investigations, law enforcement agents knew that the person using Dread Pirate Roberts as his or her Silk Road username had created and managed the site, but they did not know DPR's actual identity. In 2012 and 2013, agents from both offices investigated several individuals who the government suspected were operating Silk Road as DPR. Those individuals included Ulbricht, Anand Athavale, and Mark Karpeles. Ultimately, the New York office identified Ulbricht as DPR, but the Maryland office had investigated and later abandoned the theory [**5]  that either Athavale or Karpeles might have been Dread Pirate Roberts.

Two aspects of the pre-arrest investigation into Ulbricht are particularly relevant to this appeal: (1) the pen/trap orders that the government obtained to monitor Internet Protocol ("IP") address traffic to and from various devices associated with Ulbricht; and (2) the corrupt behavior of two Baltimore agents who worked on the Silk Road investigation.



A. The Pen/Trap Orders
In September 2013, after Ulbricht became a primary suspect in the DPR investigation, the government obtained five "pen/trap" orders. See 18 U.S.C. §§ 3121-27 ("Pen/Trap Act"). The orders authorized law enforcement agents to collect IP address data for Internet traffic to and from Ulbricht's home wireless router and other devices that regularly connected to Ulbricht's home router. According to the government's applications for the pen register and trap and trace device, "[e]very device on the Internet is identified by a  [*84]  unique number" called an IP address. S.A. 73.5Link to the text of the note "This number is used to route information between devices, for example, between two computers." Id. at 73-74. In other words, an "IP address is analogous to a telephone number" because "it indicates the online identity of [**6]  the communicating device without revealing the communication's content." Id. at 74. Ulbricht does not dispute that description of how IP addresses function.

The pen/trap orders thus did not permit the government to access the content of Ulbricht's communications, nor did the government "seek to obtain[] the contents of any communications." Id. at 75. According to Ulbricht, the government's use of his home Internet routing data violated the Fourth Amendment because it helped the government match Ulbricht's online activity with DPR's use of Silk Road. Ulbricht argues that he has a constitutional privacy interest in IP address traffic to and from his home and that the government obtained the pen/trap orders without a warrant, which would have required probable cause.



B. Corrupt Agents Force and Bridges
One of the many other tactics that the government used to expose DPR's identity was to find low-level Silk Road administrators who helped DPR maintain the site, obtain their cooperation, take over their Silk Road usernames, and chat with DPR under those identities. The true owners of the administrator accounts would assist in the investigation by helping the government chat with DPR and access various aspects of the site. [**7]  Government agents would also create their own new usernames and pose as drug dealers or buyers to purchase or sell narcotics and occasionally contact DPR directly. One of the government's principal trial witnesses, Special Agent Jared Der-Yeghiayan, used the former technique to chat with DPR under the name Cirrus. Cirrus had been a member of the Silk Road support staff before the government took over his account, and Der-Yeghiayan frequently used Silk Road's messaging system to communicate with DPR and other administrators as Cirrus. Cirrus also gave the government access to the staff chat, a separate program allowing DPR to communicate only with his employees.

Two undercover agents involved in the Silk Road investigation are of particular import to this appeal: Secret Service Special Agent Shaun Bridges and Drug Enforcement Administration ("DEA") Special Agent Carl Force, both of whom were assigned to the Baltimore investigation. Both Force and Bridges used their undercover access to exploit the site for their own benefit in various ways, and they eventually pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with their work on the Silk Road investigation.6Link to the text of the note

For example, Force and Bridges [**8]  took over an administrator account belonging to Curtis Green, who worked for Silk Road under the name Flush. According to the criminal complaint against Force and Bridges, in January 2013, Bridges used the Flush username to change other users' passwords, empty their Bitcoin wallets,7Link to the text of the note  [*85]  and keep $350,000 in Bitcoins in offshore bank accounts, all while attempting to hide his activity through a series of transactions.8Link to the text of the note Specifically, the complaint against Force and Bridges alleges that Bridges "act[ed] as an administrator to reset pins and passwords on various Silk Road vendors' accounts," then exchanged the Bitcoins for U.S. dollars using the Mt. Gox exchanger.9Link to the text of the note Supp. App'x 180. Shortly after he committed the January 2013 thefts, Bridges asked Force to chat with DPR as Nob, Force's authorized undercover username, to get advice about how to liquidate Bitcoins. He also sought Force's help in convincing Curtis Green (formerly Flush) to help him transfer Bitcoins to other accounts, and he ultimately tried to blame Green for the theft.

With the government's approval, Force also posed as a drug dealer and communicated with DPR as Nob. As part of his official undercover work as Nob, Force agreed to sell [**9]  fraudulent identification documents to DPR for $40,000 in Bitcoins. According to the criminal complaint against the agents, Force kept the Bitcoins received by his Nob account in connection with that transaction for his personal use. On another occasion, again as part of his authorized undercover work, Force advised DPR that he had access to information about Silk Road from an invented corrupt government employee. DPR paid Force $50,000 in Bitcoins for purported inside law enforcement information; Force allegedly purloined that payment as well. Moreover, outside his authorized undercover work, Force operated another account under the name French Maid, through which he again offered to sell DPR information about the government's Silk Road investigation. Acting as French Maid, Force received about $100,000 in Bitcoins that he kept for his personal use.

Force created yet another unauthorized Silk Road account, under the name DeathFromAbove, which was unknown to law enforcement until the defense identified it during trial. Force used the DeathFromAbove account to try to extort money from DPR. For example, in one such chat that took place on April 16, 2013, DeathFromAbove told DPR that he [**10]  knew that DPR's true identity was Anand Athavale. DeathFromAbove demanded a payment of $250,000 in exchange for which DeathFromAbove would remain silent about DPR's identity.10Link to the text of the note There is no evidence that DPR made the requested payment to DeathFromAbove; indeed, DPR shrugged off the  [*86]  attempted blackmail as "bogus." App'x 710.

As will be explained in more detail below, the district court prevented Ulbricht from introducing evidence at trial related to Force's corruption because doing so would have exposed the ongoing grand jury investigation into Force's conduct. The district court also denied Ulbricht discovery related to the investigation and excluded certain hearsay statements that arguably revealed Force's corruption. Ulbricht contends on appeal that the district court's various rulings concerning evidence related to Force deprived him of a fair trial. Additionally, Ulbricht did not learn of Bridges's corrupt conduct until after trial when the criminal complaint against both agents was unsealed. Thus, in his motion for a new trial, he argued that the belated disclosure violated his due process rights under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1963). Ulbricht contends on appeal that the district court incorrectly denied that motion. [**11] 



II. Ulbricht's Arrest
Ulbricht was arrested in a San Francisco public library on October 1, 2013, after the government had amassed significant evidence identifying him as Dread Pirate Roberts. The arrest was successfully orchestrated to catch Ulbricht in the act of administering Silk Road as DPR. Federal agents observed Ulbricht enter the public library, and a few minutes later Dread Pirate Roberts came online in the Silk Road staff chat. Der-Yeghiayan, under the undercover administrator username Cirrus, initiated a chat with DPR, asking him to go to a specific place on the Silk Road site to address some flagged messages from users. Der-Yeghiayan reasoned that this would "force [Ulbricht] to log in under . . . his Dread Pirate Roberts account" in the Silk Road marketplace, as well as in the staff chat software. Tr. 331-32.

Once Der-Yeghiayan knew that DPR had logged onto the flagged message page in the marketplace, he signaled another agent to effect the arrest. Ulbricht was arrested, and incident to that arrest agents seized his laptop. The same chat that Der-Yeghiayan had initiated with Dread Pirate Roberts a few minutes earlier was open on Ulbricht's screen. Ulbricht also visited the [**12]  flagged post in the marketplace that Der-Yeghiayan (as Cirrus) had asked DPR to look at during their chat. While he was chatting with Cirrus, moreover, Ulbricht had accessed Silk Road by using the "Mastermind" page. That page was available only to Dread Pirate Roberts.

A great deal of the evidence against Ulbricht came from the government's search of his laptop and his home after the arrest. On the day of Ulbricht's arrest, the government obtained a warrant to seize Ulbricht's laptop and search it for a wide variety of information related to Silk Road and information that would identify Ulbricht as Dread Pirate Roberts. Ulbricht moved to suppress the large quantity of evidence obtained from his laptop, challenging the constitutionality of that search warrant. Ulbricht argues on appeal that the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress. More details concerning the search warrant will be described in context below.



III. The Trial
Ulbricht's trial lasted approximately three weeks, from January 13 through February 4, 2015. Judge Forrest handled the complex and contentious trial with commendable patience and skill. Although Ulbricht does not challenge the sufficiency of the evidence [**13]  to support the jury's verdict on any of the counts of conviction, we  [*87]  summarize the evidence presented at trial as context for the issues raised on appeal.



A. The Government's Case
The government presented overwhelming evidence that Ulbricht created Silk Road in 2011 and continued to operate the site throughout its lifetime by maintaining its computer infrastructure, interacting with vendors, crafting policies for site users, deciding what products would be available for sale on the site, and managing a small staff of administrators and software engineers. Defense counsel conceded in his opening statement that Ulbricht did in fact create Silk Road.

According to Ulbricht's own words in a 2009 email, Ulbricht originally conceived of Silk Road as "an online storefront that couldn't be traced back to [him] . . . where [his] customers could buy [his] products" and pay for them "anonymously and securely." Tr. 991. From 2009 through 2011, Ulbricht worked to get the site up and running, relying on computer programming assistance from others, including his friend Richard Bates. According to one of the journal entries discovered on his laptop, in 2010 Ulbricht began to grow hallucinogenic mushrooms [**14]  to sell on the site "for cheap to get people interested." Tr. 899. As the site began to garner significant interest in 2011, Ulbricht wrote in his journal that he was "creating a year of prosperity and power beyond what I have ever experienced before. Silk Road is going to become a phenomenon and at least one person will tell me about it, unknowing that I was its creator." Tr. 899-900.



1. Evidence Linking Ulbricht to Dread Pirate Roberts
Around January 2012, the Silk Road user who represented himself as the lead administrator of the site adopted the username Dread Pirate Roberts.11Link to the text of the note The name alludes to the pseudonym of a pirate in the popular novel and film The Princess Bride that is periodically passed on from one individual to another.12Link to the text of the note In order to assure users that posts purporting to be authored by DPR were indeed his own, DPR authenticated his posts using an electronic signature known as a PGP key.13Link to the text of the note Silk Road users had access to a public PGP key, and DPR had a private PGP key that he alone could use to sign his Silk Road posts. When DPR signed a post using his private key, Silk Road users could run the code in the public key, and if the post was signed with the correct private key the [**15]  user would receive a message that the authentication was successful. The government recovered DPR's private PGP key on Ulbricht's laptop. Importantly, the public PGP key did not change during the site's life span, meaning that DPR used the same private key to sign his posts throughout the time that he administered Silk Road.

Additional evidence supported the conclusion that Ulbricht was Dread Pirate Roberts. For example, the instructions that DPR provided to Cirrus (the account that Der-Yeghiayan later used for undercover work) for how to access the staff chat and contact DPR directly were found in a file on Ulbricht's laptop. The government also discovered the following evidence, covering the entire period during  [*88]  which DPR managed the Silk Road site, on Ulbricht's computer: thousands of pages of chat logs with Silk Road employees; detailed journal entries describing Ulbricht's ownership of the site; a list that tracked Ulbricht's tasks and ideas related to Silk Road; a copy of Silk Road's database; and spreadsheets cataloguing both the servers that hosted Silk Road and expenses and [**16]  profits associated with the site. The government seized approximately $18 million worth of Bitcoins from the wallet on Ulbricht's laptop and analyzed their transaction history (through blockchain records) to determine that about 89% of the Bitcoins on Ulbricht's computer came from Silk Road servers located in Iceland.

A search of Ulbricht's home yielded additional evidence linking him with the site. That evidence included two USB hard drives with versions of documents related to Silk Road that were also stored on Ulbricht's laptop. There were also handwritten notes crumpled in Ulbricht's bedroom trash can about ideas for improving Silk Road's vendor rating system—an initiative that Dread Pirate Roberts had just revealed through a post in a discussion forum on the site.

The government also introduced other circumstantial evidence connecting Ulbricht to DPR's activity on Silk Road, such as evidence matching Ulbricht's actual travel history with DPR's online discussion of his travel plans. As one concrete example, the government discovered a Tor Chat log14Link to the text of the note on Ulbricht's laptop memorializing DPR's chat with a user named H7. On October 30, 2011, DPR told H7 that he would be traveling soon. [**17]  On Ulbricht's Gmail account, which uses an email address that incorporates his full name, the government discovered a travel itinerary from CheapAir that indicated that Ulbricht would be traveling on November 15, 2011.

The government introduced several additional examples of DPR discussing travel plans that matched up with travel disclosed in Ulbricht's email and social media activity. At one point, for example, Ulbricht uploaded photos to his Facebook account in an album entitled "Thailand, February 2012." DPR discussed going to Thailand in a Tor chat on January 27, 2012, indicating that he was in "Thailand now," attracted by the "allure of a warm beach." Tr. 1300. He also mentioned in a January 26 chat with a user named "vj," which stood for Variety Jones, that he was in Thailand to experience the "beaches and jungles." Id. at 1298. One of the photos in the Thailand Facebook album depicted Ulbricht "in front of what appears to be jungles and beaches," both of which were referenced in DPR's chats from late January. Id. at 1301.



2. Murders Commissioned by Dread Pirate Roberts
The government also presented evidence that DPR commissioned the murders of five people to protect Silk Road's anonymity, although there [**18]  is no evidence that any of the murders actually occurred.15Link to the text of the note In  [*89]  March 2013, a Silk Road vendor whose username was FriendlyChemist threatened to release "thousands of usernames, ordr [sic] amounts, [and] addresses" of Silk Road customers and vendors if DPR did not ensure that FriendlyChemist received money from another person, Lucydrop. Tr. 1806. Releasing the information would have destroyed the affected users' anonymity, undermining the security of the site. In a later chat with another person, RealLucyDrop, DPR wrote that it would be "terrible" if the personal information were to be released, and thus he needed FriendlyChemist's "real world identity so I can threaten him with violence if he were to release any names." Id. at 1811.

The episode escalated from there. DPR connected with Redandwhite, who was FriendlyChemist's supplier, and wrote that "FriendlyChemist is a liability and I wouldn't mind if he was executed." Id. at 1822. After negotiating the logistical details of the murder, Ulbricht agreed to pay Redandwhite $150,000 in Bitcoins to kill FriendlyChemist. DPR paid Redandwhite, who later confirmed that he had received the payment and carried out the murder, and sent what appeared [**19]  to be a photo of the dead victim to DPR. DPR replied that he had "received the picture and deleted it," and thanked Redandwhite for his "swift action." Id. at 1892. Around the same time, Ulbricht recorded in a file on his laptop that he "[g]ot word that the blackmailer was executed." Id. at 1887. The government was not able to develop any evidence linking these conversations to an actual murder. A reasonable jury could easily conclude, however, that the evidence demonstrated that Ulbricht ordered and paid for the killing, and that he believed that it had occurred.

Later, DPR ordered four other murders through Redandwhite. Dread Pirate Roberts identified another Silk Road user, Tony76, who knew FriendlyChemist and might compromise the site's anonymity. After some negotiations, DPR agreed to pay Redandwhite $500,000 in Bitcoins to kill Tony76 and three of his associates. DPR then sent the payment to Redandwhite. On April 6, 2013, Ulbricht wrote in a file on his laptop that he "[g]ave angels go ahead to find tony76." Tr. 1900. Two days later, Ulbricht recorded that he "[s]ent payment to angels for hit on tony76 and his three associates." Id. One of the government's expert witnesses was able to link the payments for all five [**20]  murders to Bitcoin wallets located on Ulbricht's laptop. Again, while the evidence demonstrates that Ulbricht ordered and paid substantial sums for the murders, there is no evidence that the killings actually took place; the government theorized that Redandwhite had tricked Ulbricht into thinking that he actually committed the murders, but that in fact he had not.



B. The Defense Case
As noted above, Ulbricht conceded at trial that he had created Silk Road, and he was caught red-handed operating the site at the end of the investigation. His principal defense strategy at trial—more of an effort at mitigation than outright denial of his guilt of the conspiracy and other charges in the indictment—was to admit his role at the beginning and end of the site's operation, but to contend that he sold Silk Road to someone else in 2011 and  [*90]  abandoned his role as its administrator, only to be lured back by the successor DPR near the end of its operation to take the blame for operating the site. The defense attempted on several occasions to implicate as alternative suspects Karpeles and Athavale, both of whom the government had investigated for a possible connection to Silk Road but later abandoned [**21]  as candidates for DPR's real-world identity. As part of his alternative-perpetrator defense, Ulbricht theorized that the person or persons who operated as the true Dread Pirate Roberts during the purported interim period planted incriminating evidence on his laptop in order to frame him. For the most part, the defense advanced this theory through cross-examination of government witnesses. Ulbricht did not testify at trial.

One point in the testimony of Richard Bates exemplifies the defense's approach and the government's response. Bates, Ulbricht's friend who assisted with computer programming issues when Ulbricht launched Silk Road, testified for the government. According to Bates, Ulbricht told him in November 2011 that he had sold Silk Road to someone else, a claim that Bates believed at the time to be true. Moreover, in a February 2013 Google chat between Bates and Ulbricht, Ulbricht wrote that he was "[g]lad" that Silk Road was "not [his] problem anymore." Tr. 1140-41.16Link to the text of the note Bates understood that to mean that Ulbricht no longer worked on the site.

To mitigate any damage from Bates's testimony, the government introduced a December 9, 2011 Tor chat between Ulbricht and vj. In that chat, vj asked [**22]  Ulbricht whether anyone else knew about his involvement in Silk Road. Ulbricht responded: "[U]nfortunately yes. There are two, but they think I sold the site and got out and they are quite convinced of it." Tr. 1191. He further wrote that those two people thought he sold the site "about a month ago," id., which roughly corresponds to the November 2011 conversation between Bates and Ulbricht. Significantly, it was shortly after this conversation that vj suggested that Ulbricht change his online identity to DPR. In view of the fictional character it referenced, the government contended that the online moniker DPR was deliberately adopted to support the cover story that the lead administrator of Silk Road changed over time.

Thus, although the government elicited testimony that Ulbricht told Bates that he sold the site in 2011, it also presented evidence that Ulbricht had lied to Bates about that sale and continued to operate the site in secret.



1. Cross-Examination of Government Witnesses
Ulbricht's defense depended heavily on cross-examination of government witnesses, much of which was designed to support the argument that either Karpeles or Athavale was the real DPR, or that multiple people operated [**23]  as Dread Pirate Roberts during Silk Road's life span. The district court limited his cross-examination in two ways that Ulbricht challenges on appeal. First, the district court prevented Ulbricht from exploring several specific topics with Der-Yeghiayan, the government's first witness, through whom it introduced much of its evidence. Those topics included, inter alia, Der-Yeghiayan's prior suspicions that Karpeles was DPR. Second, the district court limited Ulbricht's ability to cross examine FBI computer scientist Thomas Kiernan, who testified  [*91]  about evidence that he discovered on Ulbricht's laptop, concerning several specific technical issues related to software on Ulbricht's computer. More details about those attempted cross-examinations will be discussed in context below.



2. Hearsay Statements
Ulbricht also attempted to introduce two hearsay statements in his defense, both of which the district court excluded as inadmissible. Those hearsay statements comprise: (1) chats between DPR and DeathFromAbove (Force) concerning Force's attempt to extort money from DPR in exchange for information about the government's investigation of Silk Road; and (2) the government's letter describing a [**24]  statement by Andrew Jones, a site administrator, concerning one particular conversation that he had with DPR. The contents of those hearsay statements and other relevant facts will be discussed in more detail below.



3. Defense Expert Witnesses
Long after the trial began on January 13, 2015, and shortly before the government rested on February 2 and the defense rested on February 3, Ulbricht disclosed to the government his intent to call two expert witnesses: Dr. Steven Bellovin and Andreas Antonopoulos.17Link to the text of the note The Antonopoulos disclosure indicated that he would testify on several subjects relevant to Silk Road, including "the origins of Bitcoin," "the various purposes and uses of Bitcoin," "the mechanics of Bitcoin transactions," "the value of Bitcoin over time since its inception," and "the concepts of Bitcoin speculating and Bitcoin mining," among other things. App'x 349. The Bellovin disclosure followed a similar pattern, indicating that he would testify about "[g]eneral principles of internet security and vulnerabilities," the "import of some lines of PHP code provided to defense counsel in discovery," and "[g]eneral principles of public-key cryptography," among other topics. Id. at 360. Neither disclosure summarized [**25]  the opinions that the experts would offer on those subjects, nor did either identify the bases for the experts' opinions.

On January 29 and 31, the government moved to preclude the testimony of both proffered experts. The government argued that the expert notices were untimely and did not contain the information required by Rule 16 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, including a summary of the opinions that the experts would offer on the stand.18Link to the text of the note On February 1—three days before the end of the trial—the district court granted the government's motions and precluded both experts from testifying, concluding that the defendant's notices were late and that the disclosures were substantively inadequate under Rule 16. Ulbricht claims that the district court erred in precluding his experts from testifying.

In sum, the defense case was limited to cross-examining government witnesses, briefly calling four character witnesses, having a defense investigator authenticate a task list on Ulbricht's computer, and reading a few of DPR's posts into the record. Ulbricht contends, however, that his defense was hamstrung by the rulings described above.



C. The Verdict and Post-Trial Motion
After deliberating for about three and a half hours, the jury returned [**26]  a guilty verdict  [*92]  on all seven counts in the Indictment. As described in more detail below, Ulbricht then moved for a new trial under Rule 33, Fed. R. Crim. P. The district court denied the motion, and Ulbricht argues here that it erred in doing so.



IV. Sentencing
The United States Probation Office prepared the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report ("PSR") in March 2015. It described the offense conduct in detail and discussed the five murders that Ulbricht allegedly hired Redandwhite to commit.19Link to the text of the note Over Ulbricht's objection, the PSR also discussed six drug-related deaths that the government contended, and the district court found, were connected with Silk Road. Circumstantial evidence linked each of those fatalities with varying degrees of certainty to the decedent's purchase of drugs on Silk Road. For example, one user died from an overdose of heroin combined with other drugs. The deceased individual was found with a needle and a bag of heroin, as well as a torn-open delivery package. Open on his computer was a Silk Road chat in which a vendor described the package of heroin that was due to arrive that day, including a tracking number that matched the opened package.

Two other individuals whose deaths the PSR [**27]  described were Silk Road customers who purchased drugs on the site shortly before their deaths. A fourth person died after ingesting a synthetic drug originally purchased on Silk Road that he obtained through an intermediary dealer, and a fifth died after leaping from a balcony while high on a psychedelic drug that he bought from the site. A sixth person died of pneumonia after placing over thirty orders for heroin and other drugs on Silk Road; the autopsy report theorized that his drug use may have "blunted the deceased's perception of the severity of his illness," thus contributing to his premature death. PSR ¶ 83. In arguing that the district court should consider the six deaths, the government explained that they "illustrate the obvious: that drugs can cause serious harm, including death." App'x 902.

In the first of several sentencing submissions, Ulbricht urged the district court not to consider the six drug-related deaths and to strike them from the PSR. In support of that argument, Ulbricht claimed that Silk Road had harm-reducing effects, meaning that it made drug use less dangerous. Specifically, Ulbricht employed Dr. Fernando Caudevilla (username Doctor X), a physician who [**28]  provided drug-use advice to the site's customers. Caudevilla spent up to two or three hours a day on Silk Road discussion fora and sent over 450 messages providing guidance about illegal drug dosage and administration, as well as information about the harms associated with certain drugs. Caudevilla also provided weekly reports to DPR concerning the advice he gave to the site's users. Ulbricht further claimed that Silk Road allowed for better drug quality control because vendors were subject to a rating system,20Link to the text of the note buyers were able to choose from among many different sellers, and the site's anonymity encouraged free dialogue about drug use that helped mitigate the stigma accompanying drug addiction.21Link to the text of the note According  [*93]  to Caudevilla, when the site received negative feedback about the quality of the drugs sold by a vendor, that vendor was removed from the site. Finally, Ulbricht claimed that the site reduced violence associated with the drug trade by providing a safe, computer-based method of purchasing drugs.

Ulbricht also submitted an expert report from Dr. Mark Taff, which provided an alternative reason for excluding the six deaths from the PSR. In his report, Dr. Taff explained that, based on the [**29]  information available, it was impossible to know with medical certainty that Silk Road drugs caused the six deaths described in the PSR. There were "gaping holes" in the investigations into each death, and some were missing autopsy reports, toxicology reports, and death certificates. App'x 911. Moreover, Dr. Taff claimed that it was impossible to know the cause of each death because several of the deceased had ingested multiple drugs prior to their deaths. Ulbricht argued that, absent a clear causal link between the deaths and the offense conduct, the deaths were not relevant to his sentencing at all.

The defense later submitted another sentencing memorandum, which included 97 letters from friends and family describing Ulbricht's good character as well as academic articles about the myriad problems associated with unduly severe sentences for drug crimes. He also urged the district court not to consider the five murders commissioned by DPR, in part because he claimed only to have fantasized about the murders, implying that he did not expect them to be carried out. In its sentencing submission, the government requested that the district court impose a sentence substantially above the [**30]  twenty-year mandatory minimum.

Ulbricht's sentencing hearing took place on May 29, 2015.22Link to the text of the note The district court concluded that Ulbricht's offense level was 43—the highest possible offense level under the Sentencing Guidelines—and that his criminal history category was I.23Link to the text of the note The high offense level largely resulted from the massive quantity of drugs trafficked using Silk Road, as well as several enhancements, including one for directing the use of violence, U.S.S.G. § 2D1.1(b)(2).24Link to the text of the note Ulbricht does not dispute that calculation. Due to the high offense level, the Guidelines advisory sentence "range" was life in prison, and the U.S. Probation Office recommended that sentence.

At the sentencing hearing, the district court resolved several disputed issues of fact. For example, because Ulbricht contested  [*94]  his responsibility for the five commissioned murders for hire, the district court found by a preponderance of the evidence that Ulbricht did in fact commission the murders, believing that they would be carried out. The district court characterized the evidence of the murders for hire, which included Ulbricht's journal, chats with other Silk Road users, and the evidence showing that Ulbricht actually paid a total of $650,000 [**31]  in Bitcoins for the killings, as "ample and unambiguous." App'x 1465.

The court then turned to the six drug-related deaths described in the PSR. Over Ulbricht's objection, the district court found that the deaths were "related conduct relevant to his sentencing" because the "question as to whether this information is properly included in the PSR is whether the Court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence[,] that the deaths, in some way, related to Silk Road." Id. at 1472. It went on to explain that "the relevant offense committed is the unlawful distribution of drugs and the running of a criminal drug enterprise, . . . [and] based on the evidence before the Court, the sale of the drugs through Silk Road caused harm to the decedents." Id. at 1473. The district court described the facts associated with five of the deaths and specifically found that each was connected to Silk Road, rejecting the defendant's argument that but-for causation was required in order for the court to consider the deaths as relevant to the offense conduct.25Link to the text of the note Parents of two of the decedents also made statements at the proceeding, describing the emotional impact that the losses had on them and their families.

In the course of explaining [**32]  its reasons for choosing Ulbricht's sentence, the district court discussed the facts of Ulbricht's offense, his apparent character, and the purposes of criminal punishment. The court described Doctor X as "enabling," App'x 1530, rather than reducing the harms associated with drug use, emphasized the social costs attendant to expanding the scope of the drug market, discussed the five murders for hire, and stated that the sentence imposed on Ulbricht could have a powerful general deterrent effect because the case had attracted an unusually large amount of publicity. The court then sentenced Ulbricht principally to life imprisonment.

This appeal followed.



DISCUSSION
On appeal, Ulbricht raises a number of claims of error. For purposes of organizational clarity, we group them into three categories, and present them in the order in which the issues arose in the district court. Accordingly, we discuss first Ulbricht's claims that much of the evidence against him should have been suppressed because it was obtained in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights; second, his arguments that the district court's evidentiary errors denied him a fair trial; and third, his objections to his sentence.



I. Fourth Amendment Issues
Ulbricht [**33]  claims that the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment. HN1 On appeal from a denial of a suppression motion, "we review a district court's findings of fact for clear error, and its resolution of questions of law  [*95]  and mixed questions of law and fact de novo." United States v. Bohannon, 824 F.3d 242, 247-48 (2d Cir. 2016). Ulbricht raises two principal arguments. First, he contends that the pen/trap orders that the government used to monitor IP address traffic to and from his home router violated the Fourth Amendment because the government obtained the orders without a warrant. Second, he claims that the warrants authorizing the government to search his laptop as well as his Google and Facebook accounts violated the Fourth Amendment's particularity requirement. We reject those contentions and affirm the denial of Ulbricht's motion to suppress.



A. Pen/Trap Orders
Pursuant to orders issued by United States magistrate judges in the Southern District of New York, the government used five pen registers and trap and trace devices to monitor IP addresses associated with Internet traffic to and from Ulbricht's wireless home router and devices that regularly connected to that router. The government obtained the orders pursuant to HN2 the Pen/Trap [**34]  Act, which provides that a government attorney "may make [an] application for an order . . . authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace device . . . to a court of competent jurisdiction." 18 U.S.C. § 3122(a)(1). A "pen register" is defined as a "device or process which records or decodes dialing, routing, addressing, or signaling information transmitted by an instrument or facility from which a wire or electronic communication is transmitted," and "shall not include the contents of any communication." Id. § 3127(3). A "trap and trace" device means "a device or process which captures the incoming electronic or other impulses which identify the originating number or other dialing, routing, addressing, and signaling information reasonably likely to identify the source of a wire or electronic communication." Id. § 3127(4). Like pen registers, trap and trace devices may not capture the "contents of any communication." Id. The statute does not require a search warrant for the use of a pen register or trap and trace device, nor does it demand the kind of showing required to obtain such a warrant. Rather, the statute requires only that the application contain a "certification . . . that [**35]  the information likely to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation." Id. § 3122(b)(2).

The orders in this case authorized the government to "use a pen register and trap and trace device to identify the source and destination [IP] addresses, along with the dates, times, durations, ports of transmission, and any Transmission Control Protocol ('TCP') connection data,26Link to the text of the note associated with any electronic communications sent to or from" various devices, including Ulbricht's home wireless router and his laptop.27Link to the text of the note S.A. 93. In each order, the government  [*96]  specified that it did not seek to obtain the contents of any communications. Instead, it sought authorization to collect only "dialing, routing, addressing, and signaling information" that was akin to data captured by "traditional telephonic pen registers and trap and trace devices." Id. at 130. Ulbricht claims that the pen/trap orders violated the Fourth Amendment because he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the IP address routing information that the orders allowed the government to collect.28Link to the text of the note

HN3 The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that: "The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, [**36]  and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized." The "cornerstone of the modern law of searches is the principle that, to mount a successful Fourth Amendment challenge, a defendant must demonstrate that he personally has an expectation of privacy in the place searched." United States v. Haqq, 278 F.3d 44, 47 (2d Cir. 2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, a "Fourth Amendment 'search[]' . . . does not occur unless the search invades an object or area [in which] one has a subjective expectation of privacy that society is prepared to accept as objectively reasonable." United States v. Hayes, 551 F.3d 138, 143 (2d Cir. 2008).

The Supreme Court has long held that HN4 a "person has no legitimate expectation of privacy in information he voluntarily turns over to third parties," including phone numbers dialed in making a telephone call and captured by a pen register. Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735, 743-44, 99 S. Ct. 2577, 61 L. Ed. 2d 220 (1979). This is so because phone users "typically know that they must convey numerical information to the phone company; that the phone company has facilities for recording this information; and that the phone company does in fact record this information for a variety of legitimate business purposes." Id. at 743. Similarly, "e-mail and Internet [**37]  users . . . rely on third-party equipment in order to engage in communication." United States v. Forrester, 512 F.3d 500, 510 (9th Cir. 2008). Internet users thus "should know that this information is provided to and used by Internet service providers for the specific purpose of directing the routing of information." Id. Moreover, "IP addresses are not merely passively conveyed through third party equipment, but rather are voluntarily turned over in order to direct the third party's servers." United States v. Christie, 624 F.3d 558, 574 (3d Cir. 2010) (internal quotation marks omitted).

Ulbricht notes that questions have been raised about whether some aspects of modern technology, which entrust great quantities of significant personal information to  [*97]  third party vendors, arguably making extensive government surveillance possible, call for a re-evaluation of the third-party disclosure doctrine established by Smith. See, e.g., United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 417-18, 132 S. Ct. 945, 181 L. Ed. 2d 911 (2012) (Sotomayor, J., concurring); American Civil Liberties Union v. Clapper, 785 F.3d 787, 824 (2d Cir. 2015). HN5 We remain bound, however, by that rule until and unless it is overruled by the Supreme Court. See United States v. Gomez, 580 F.3d 94, 104 (2d Cir. 2009); see also United States v. Wheelock, 772 F.3d 825, 829 (8th Cir. 2014).

Moreover, whatever novel or more intrusive surveillance techniques might present future questions concerning the appropriate scope of the third-party disclosure doctrine, the orders in this case do not present such issues. The recording of IP [**38]  address information and similar routing data, which reveal the existence of connections between communications devices without disclosing the content of the communications, are precisely analogous to the capture of telephone numbers at issue in Smith. That is why the orders here fit comfortably within the language of a statute drafted with the earlier technology in mind. The substitution of electronic methods of communication for telephone calls does not alone create a reasonable expectation of privacy in the identities of devices with whom one communicates. Nor does it raise novel issues distinct from those long since resolved in the context of telephone communication, with which society has lived for the nearly forty years since Smith was decided. Like telephone companies, Internet service providers require that identifying information be disclosed in order to make communication among electronic devices possible. In light of the Smith rule, no reasonable person could maintain a privacy interest in that sort of information.

We therefore join the other circuits that have considered this narrow question and hold that HN6 collecting IP address information devoid of content is "constitutionally [**39]  indistinguishable from the use of a pen register." Forrester, 512 F.3d at 510; see, e.g., Wheelock, 772 F.3d at 828 (holding that HN7 the defendant "cannot claim a reasonable expectation of privacy in [the] government's acquisition of his subscriber information, including his IP address and name," because it had been "revealed to a third party" (internal quotation marks omitted)); Christie, 624 F.3d at 573 (holding that HN8 there is no expectation of privacy in "subscriber information provided to an internet provider," such as an IP address (internal quotation marks omitted)); see also Guest v. Leis, 255 F.3d 325, 336 (6th Cir. 2001) (holding that HN9 "computer users do not have a legitimate expectation of privacy in their [bulletin board] subscriber information because they have conveyed it to another person"); United States v. Graham, 824 F.3d 421, 432 (4th Cir. 2016) (en banc) (noting that HN10 "third-party information relating to the sending and routing of electronic communications does not receive Fourth Amendment protection"); United States v. Carpenter, 819 F.3d 880, 887 (6th Cir. 2016) (HN11 "[C]ourts have not (yet, at least) extended [Fourth Amendment] protections to the internet analogue to envelope markings, namely the metadata used to route internet communications, like . . . IP addresses."). Where, as here, the government did not access the contents of any of Ulbricht's communications, it did not need to obtain a warrant to collect IP address routing information in which [**40]  Ulbricht did not have a legitimate privacy interest. We therefore reject Ulbricht's contention that the issuance of such orders  [*98]  violated his Fourth Amendment rights.29Link to the text of the note

Ulbricht's additional arguments are not persuasive. Ulbricht contends generally that pen/trap orders may monitor a communication's content by tracking metadata, but he does not identify what metadata the government might have collected or explain how the pen/trap orders in this case gave the government information concerning the content of his communications. He also claims that the orders violated the Fourth Amendment by impermissibly monitoring activity within his home, relying on Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27, 121 S. Ct. 2038, 150 L. Ed. 2d 94 (2001). In Kyllo, the Court held that using thermal-imaging technology from outside the home to discern whether a person was growing marijuana in the home might reveal innocent, non-criminal information in which a resident has a privacy interest. Id. at 38. Ulbricht contends that monitoring IP address traffic through his router is similar to the thermal-imaging technology because it might reveal when and how Ulbricht used his computer when he was at home. The same can [**41]  be said, however, of an ordinary telephone pen register, which can reveal if, when, and how a person uses his or her home phone to make calls. See Smith, 442 U.S. at 743. IP address traffic similarly reveals whether an Internet subscriber (or, more precisely, a person who uses the subscriber's Internet connection) is home and using the Internet. Nothing in Kyllo suggests that government monitoring of data disclosed to an outside telephone or Internet provider for ordinary business purposes becomes constitutionally suspect when investigators use that information to draw inferences about whether someone is making telephone calls or accessing websites from inside his or her home. We therefore see no constitutional difference between monitoring home phone dialing information and IP address routing data. Thus, we conclude that the pen register and trap and trace orders did not violate the Fourth Amendment.30Link to the text of the note



 [*99]  B. Search Warrants
Ulbricht also contends that the warrants authorizing the search and seizure of his laptop as well as his Facebook and Google accounts violated the Fourth Amendment's particularity requirement. HN12 The Fourth Amendment explicitly commands that warrants must be based on probable cause and must "particularly describ[e] the place to be searched, and the persons [**42]  or things to be seized." U.S. Const. amend. IV. "It is familiar history that indiscriminate searches and seizures conducted under the authority of 'general warrants' were the immediate evils that motivated the framing and adoption of the Fourth Amendment." Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 583, 100 S. Ct. 1371, 63 L. Ed. 2d 639 (1980). Those general warrants "specified only an offense," leaving "to the discretion of the executing officials the decision as to which persons should be arrested and which places should be searched." Steagald v. United States, 451 U.S. 204, 220, 101 S. Ct. 1642, 68 L. Ed. 2d 38 (1981). The principal defect in such a warrant was that it permitted a "general, exploratory rummaging in a person's belongings," Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U.S. 463, 480, 96 S. Ct. 2737, 49 L. Ed. 2d 627 (1976) (internal quotation marks omitted), a problem that the Fourth Amendment attempted to resolve by requiring the warrant to "set out with particularity" the "scope of the authorized search," Kentucky v. King, 563 U.S. 452, 459, 131 S. Ct. 1849, 179 L. Ed. 2d 865 (2011).31Link to the text of the note

HN14 To be sufficiently particular under the Fourth Amendment, a warrant must satisfy three requirements. First, "a warrant must identify the specific offense for which the police have established probable cause." United States v. Galpin, 720 F.3d 436, 445 (2d Cir. 2013). Second, "a warrant must describe the place to be searched." Id. at 445-46. Finally, the "warrant must specify the items to be seized by their relation to designated crimes." Id. at 446 (internal quotation marks omitted).

HN15 "Where, as here, the property to be searched is a computer hard drive, the particularity requirement [**43]  assumes even greater importance." Id. A general search of electronic data is an especially potent threat to privacy because hard drives and e-mail accounts may be "akin to a residence in terms of the scope and quantity of private information [they] may contain." Id. The "seizure of a computer hard drive, and its subsequent retention by the government, can [therefore] give the government possession of a vast trove of personal information about the person to whom the drive belongs, much of which may be entirely irrelevant to the criminal investigation that led to the seizure." United States v. Ganias, 824 F.3d 199, 217 (2d Cir. 2016) (en banc). Such sensitive records might include "[t]ax records, diaries, personal photographs, electronic books, electronic media, medical data, records of internet searches, [and] banking and shopping information." Id. at 218. Because of the nature of digital storage, it is not always feasible to "extract and segregate responsive data from non-responsive data," id. at 213, creating a "serious risk that every warrant for electronic information will become, in effect, a general warrant," Galpin, 720 F.3d at 447 (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, we have held that warrants that fail to "link [the evidence  [*100]  sought] to the criminal activity supported by probable [**44]  cause" do not satisfy the particularity requirement because they "lack[] meaningful parameters on an otherwise limitless search" of a defendant's electronic media. United States v. Rosa, 626 F.3d 56, 62 (2d Cir. 2010).

HN16 The Fourth Amendment does not require a perfect description of the data to be searched and seized, however. Search warrants covering digital data may contain "some ambiguity . . . so long as law enforcement agents have done the best that could reasonably be expected under the circumstances, have acquired all the descriptive facts which a reasonable investigation could be expected to cover, and have insured that all those facts were included in the warrant." Galpin, 720 F.3d at 446 (internal quotation marks omitted).

Moreover, it is important to bear in mind that HN17 a search warrant does not necessarily lack particularity simply because it is broad. Since a search of a computer is "akin to [a search of] a residence," id., searches of computers may sometimes need to be as broad as searches of residences pursuant to warrants. Similarly, traditional searches for paper records, like searches for electronic records, have always entailed the exposure of records that are not the objects of the search to at least superficial examination in order to identify and seize those [**45]  records that are. And in many cases, the volume of records properly subject to seizure because of their evidentiary value may be vast. None of these consequences necessarily turns a search warrant into a prohibited general warrant.



1. Laptop Search Warrant
The warrant authorizing the search and seizure of Ulbricht's laptop (the "Laptop Warrant") explicitly incorporated by reference an affidavit listing the crimes charged, which at the time included narcotics trafficking, computer hacking, money laundering, and murder-for-hire offenses in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846, 18 U.S.C. §§ 1030, 1956, and 1958. See 650 Fifth Ave. v. Alavi Found., 830 F.3d 66, 101 (2d Cir. 2016) (describing the requirements for a criminal search warrant's incorporation of an affidavit by reference).32Link to the text of the note The affidavit also described the workings of Silk Road and the role of Dread Pirate Roberts in operating the site and included a wealth of information supporting a finding that there was probable cause to believe that Ulbricht and DPR were the same person. Based on that information, the Laptop Warrant alleged that Ulbricht "use[d] [the laptop] in connection with his operation of Silk Road," and that there was "probable cause to believe that evidence, fruits, and instrumentalities of the [charged offenses]" would be found on [**46]  the laptop. S.A. 246.33Link to the text of the note

Generally speaking, the Laptop Warrant divided the information to be searched for and seized into two categories. The first covered evidence concerning Silk Road that was located on the computer, including, inter alia, "data associated with the Silk Road website, such as web content, server code, or database records"; any evidence concerning servers or computer equipment connected with Silk Road; e-mails, private messages, and forum postings or "other communications concerning Silk Road in any way"; evidence concerning "funds used to facilitate or proceeds  [*101]  derived from Silk Road," including Bitcoin wallet files and transactions with Bitcoin exchangers, or "information concerning any financial accounts . . . where Silk Road funds may be stored"; and "any evidence concerning any illegal activity associated with Silk Road." Id. at 246-48.

The second category of information in the Laptop Warrant included "evidence relevant to corroborating the identification of Ulbricht as the Silk Road user 'Dread Pirate Roberts.'" Id. at 248. In order to connect Ulbricht with DPR, the Laptop Warrant authorized agents to search for: "any communications or writings by Ulbricht, which may reflect linguistic [**47]  patterns or idiosyncra[s]ies associated with 'Dread Pirate Roberts,' or political/economic views associated with [DPR] . . ."; "any evidence concerning any computer equipment, software, or usernames used by Ulbricht, to allow comparison with" computer equipment used by DPR; "any evidence concerning Ulbricht's travel or patterns of movement, to allow comparison with patterns of online activity of [DPR]"; "any evidence concerning Ulbricht's technical expertise concerning Tor, Bitcoins," and other computer programming issues; any evidence concerning Ulbricht's attempts to "obtain fake identification documents," use aliases, or otherwise evade law enforcement; and "any other evidence implicating Ulbricht in the subject offenses." Id. at 248-49 (footnote omitted).

After careful consideration of the warrant, the supporting affidavit, and Ulbricht's arguments, we conclude that the Laptop Warrant did not violate the Fourth Amendment's particularity requirement.34Link to the text of the note We note, at the outset of our review, that the warrant plainly satisfies the basic elements of the particularity requirement as traditionally understood. By incorporating the affidavit by reference, the Laptop Warrant lists the charged crimes, describes the place to be searched, [**48]  and designates the information to be seized in connection with the specified offenses. Each category of information sought is relevant to Silk Road, DPR's operation thereof, or identifying Ulbricht as DPR. We do not understand Ulbricht's arguments to contest the Laptop Warrant's basic compliance with those requirements.35Link to the text of the note

Rather, Ulbricht's arguments turn on the special problems associated with searches of computers which, as we have acknowledged in prior cases, Galpin, 720 F.3d at 447; Ganias, 824 F.3d at 217-18, can be particularly intrusive. These arguments merit careful attention. For example, Ulbricht questions the appropriateness of the protocols that the Laptop Warrant instructed officers to use in executing the search. Those procedures included opening or "cursorily reading the first few" pages of files to "determine their precise contents," searching for deliberately hidden files, using "key word searches through all electronic storage areas," and reviewing  [*102]  file "directories" to determine what was relevant. S.A. 253. Ulbricht, supported by amicus the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers ("NACDL"), argues that the warrant was insufficiently particular because the government and the magistrate judge failed to specify [**49]  the search terms and protocols ex ante in the warrant.

We cannot agree. As illustrated by the facts of this very case, it will often be impossible to identify in advance the words or phrases that will separate relevant files or documents before the search takes place, because officers cannot readily anticipate how a suspect will store information related to the charged crimes. Files and documents can easily be given misleading or coded names, and words that might be expected to occur in pertinent documents can be encrypted; even very simple codes can defeat a pre-planned word search. For example, at least one of the folders on Ulbricht's computer had a name with the misspelling "aliaces." App'x 309. For a more challenging example, Ulbricht also kept records of certain Tor chats in a file on his laptop that was labeled "mbsobzvkhwx4hmjt." Id. at 398.36Link to the text of the note

The agents reasonably anticipated that they would face such problems in this case. Operating Silk Road involved using sophisticated technology to mask its users' identities. Accordingly, although we acknowledge the NACDL's suggestions in its amicus submission for limiting the scope of such search terms, the absence of the proposed limitations [**50]  does not violate the particularity requirement on the facts of this case. We therefore conclude that, in preparing the Laptop Warrant, "law enforcement agents [did] the best that could reasonably be expected under the circumstances, [had] acquired all the descriptive facts which a reasonable investigation could be expected to cover, and [had] insured that all those facts were included in the warrant." Galpin, 720 F.3d at 446 (internal quotation marks omitted).

The fundamental flaw in Ulbricht's (and the NACDL's) argument is that it confuses a warrant's breadth with a lack of particularity. As noted above, HN18 breadth and particularity are related but distinct concepts. A warrant may be broad, in that it authorizes the government to search an identified location or object for a wide range of potentially relevant material, without violating the particularity requirement. For example, a warrant may allow the government to search a suspected drug dealer's entire home where there is probable cause to believe that evidence relevant to that activity may be found anywhere in the residence. Similarly, "[w]hen the criminal activity pervades [an] entire business, seizure of all records of the business is appropriate, and broad [**51]  language used in warrants will not offend the particularity requirements." U.S. Postal Serv. v. C.E.C. Servs., 869 F.2d 184, 187 (2d Cir. 1989). Ulbricht used his laptop to commit the charged offenses by creating and continuing to operate Silk Road. Thus, a broad warrant allowing the government to search his laptop for potentially extensive evidence of those crimes does not offend the Fourth Amendment, as long as that  [*103]  warrant meets the three particularity criteria outlined above.

It is also true that allowing law enforcement to search his writings for linguistic similarities with DPR authorizes a broad search of written materials on Ulbricht's hard drive. That fact, however, does not mean that the warrants violated the Fourth Amendment. The Laptop Warrant clearly explained that the government planned to compare Ulbricht's writings to DPR's posts to confirm that they were the same person, by identifying both linguistic patterns and distinctive shared political or economic views. Ulbricht and the NACDL similarly claim that searching for all evidence of his travel patterns and movement violates the Fourth Amendment's particularity requirement. Again, the warrant explained that it sought information about Ulbricht's travel "to allow comparison with patterns of online activity of 'Dread Pirate Roberts' [**52]  and any information known about his location at particular times." S.A. 248. Thus, the Laptop Warrant connects the information sought to the crimes charged and, more specifically, its relevance to identifying Ulbricht as the perpetrator of those crimes.37Link to the text of the note

We remain sensitive to the difficulties associated with preserving a criminal defendant's privacy while searching through his electronic data and computer hard drives. In the course of searching for information related to Silk Road and DPR, the government may indeed have come across personal documents that were unrelated to Ulbricht's crimes. Such HN19 an invasion of a criminal defendant's privacy is inevitable, however, in almost any warranted search because in "searches for papers, it is certain that some innocuous documents will be examined, at least cursorily, in order to determine whether they are, in fact, among those papers authorized to be seized." Ganias, 824 F.3d at 211, quoting Andresen, 427 U.S. at 482 n.11. The Fourth Amendment limits such "unwarranted intrusions upon privacy," id. (internal quotation marks omitted), by requiring a warrant to describe its scope with particularity. The Laptop Warrant satisfied that requirement. Ulbricht has challenged only the facial validity of the Laptop Warrant [**53]  and not its execution. Because we have no reason to doubt that the officers faithfully executed the warrant, its execution did not result in an undue invasion of Ulbricht's privacy.

Finally, we note that the crimes charged in this case were somewhat unusual. This case does not involve a more typical situation in which officers searched for evidence of a physician's illegal distribution of pain medications, to use the NACDL's example, which may have electronically-stored data associated with the alleged crimes on a hard drive that largely contains non-criminal information. Here the crimes under investigation were committed largely  [*104]  through computers that there was probable cause to believe included the laptop at issue, and the search warrant application gave ample basis for the issuing magistrate judge to conclude that evidence related to Silk Road and Ulbricht's use of the DPR username likely permeated Ulbricht's computer. Thus, given the nature of Ulbricht's crimes and their symbiotic connection to his digital devices, we decline to rethink the well-settled Fourth Amendment principles that the Laptop Warrant may implicate. A future case may require this Court to articulate special limitations on digital [**54]  searches to effectuate the Fourth Amendment's particularity or reasonableness requirements. Such a case is not before us.



2. The Google and Facebook Warrants
Ulbricht also challenges the warrants that allowed the government to search his Google and Facebook accounts, although he does not present any specific arguments related to those warrants. Both warrants, through affidavits incorporated by reference, set forth the basis for probable cause to search those accounts for evidence of Ulbricht's involvement in Silk Road. The warrants also authorized the government to search his Google and Facebook accounts for "evidence, fruits, and instrumentalities" of the specified offenses, including, inter alia: "any communications or writings by Ulbricht"; "any evidence concerning any computer equipment, software, or usernames used by Ulbricht"; "any evidence concerning Ulbricht's travel or patterns of movement"; and any "other evidence of the" crimes charged. S.A. 334-35, 393-94. The scope of the Google and Facebook warrants thus substantially paralleled that of the Laptop Warrant.

The Google and Facebook warrants were constitutional for the same reasons that the Laptop Warrant was valid. They satisfied all three [**55]  of the particularity requirements because they listed the subject offenses, described the things to be searched, and identified the information to be seized in relation to the charged crimes. Ulbricht does not advance any additional arguments specific to the Google and Facebook warrants, nor have we identified any independent reason to find them unconstitutionally lacking in specificity.



3. Conclusion
In sum, the issuance of the pen/trap orders and the three search warrants that Ulbricht challenges in this appeal did not violate the Fourth Amendment.38Link to the text of the note Thus, we affirm the district court's denial of Ulbricht's suppression motion.



II. The District Court's Trial Rulings and Ulbricht's Rule 33 Motion
Ulbricht contends that he did not receive a fair trial for several reasons: (1) the district court's rulings surrounding corrupt agents Force and Bridges violated his due process rights; (2) the district court erroneously precluded two defense experts from testifying; (3) the district court abused its discretion when it curtailed Ulbricht's cross-examination of two government witnesses; and (4) the district court erred when it ruled that certain hearsay statements were inadmissible. He also contends that, even if each [**56]  individual error is harmless, the cumulative effect of those  [*105]  errors prejudiced him to the extent that his trial was fundamentally unfair. We detect no error in the district court's rulings on any of those issues and therefore conclude that Ulbricht was not deprived of his right to a fair trial.



A. Corrupt Agents Force and Bridges
Ulbricht's principal fair trial argument is that the district court erred in numerous ways by preventing him from relying on information related to the corruption of two federal agents, Force and Bridges, involved in the investigation of the Silk Road site. Before trial, the district court (1) precluded Ulbricht from referring at trial to the secret grand jury proceeding against Force; (2) denied Ulbricht discovery related to the Force investigation; and (3) denied Ulbricht an adjournment of the trial until the Force investigation was complete. During trial, the district court excluded as hearsay certain chats that related to Force's illicit use of Silk Road. Finally, Ulbricht learned after trial that the government was investigating a second corrupt agent, Bridges. Ulbricht contends that the failure to disclose Bridges's corruption until after the trial violated [**57]  Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1963), and that the district court erroneously denied his motion for a new trial on that ground.

Without question, the shocking personal corruption of these two government agents disgraced the agencies for which they worked and embarrassed the many honorable men and women working in those agencies to investigate serious criminal wrongdoing. Even more importantly, when law enforcement officers abuse their offices for personal gain, commit other criminal acts, violate the rights of citizens, or lie under oath, they undermine the public's vital trust in the integrity of law enforcement. They may also compromise the investigations and prosecutions on which they work.

At the same time, the venality of individual agents does not necessarily affect the reliability of the government's evidence in a particular case or become relevant to the adjudication of every case in which the agents participated. Courts are obligated to ensure that probative evidence is disclosed to the defense, carefully evaluated by the court for its materiality to the case, and submitted for the jury's consideration where admissible. But courts must also take care that wrongdoing by investigators that has no bearing on the [**58]  matter before the court not be used as a diversion from fairly assessing the prosecution's case. Like any other potential evidence, information about police corruption must be evaluated by reference to the ordinary rules of criminal procedure and evidence, a task to which we now turn.



1. Background: Pretrial Disclosure of the Force Investigation
The government disclosed its investigation into Force's corruption to the defense about six weeks before trial. Initially, on November 21, 2014, the government wrote a sealed ex parte letter to the district court seeking permission to disclose to the defense information about the Force grand jury investigation subject to a protective order.39Link to the text of the note The district court granted the application. On December 1, the government provided a copy of the November 21 letter, which otherwise remained sealed, to defense  [*106]  counsel. According to the letter, Force leaked information to DPR in exchange for payment and "corruptly obtain[ed] proceeds from the Silk Road website and convert[ed] them to his personal use."App'x 649. The government then undertook to purge its trial evidence of anything arguably traceable to Force.

Ulbricht moved to unseal the entire November 21 letter so that he could [**59]  rely on the information in the letter that related to Force's corruption at trial, arguing that the letter included Brady information and that he therefore had a particularized need to disclose the information that outweighed the presumption of grand jury secrecy. He also requested discovery and subpoenas under Rules 16 and 17, Fed. R. Crim. P., to learn more about the scope of Force's corruption. In the alternative, Ulbricht sought an adjournment of the trial until the Force investigation concluded and information about his corruption might become public through the filing of charges against him. On December 15, the district court held a sealed hearing on that issue and invited further written submissions, including a particularized list of Ulbricht's discovery requests. One week later, the district court issued a sealed and partially redacted opinion40Link to the text of the note denying all of Ulbricht's requests. The court did indicate, however, that throughout the trial it would "entertain specific requests to use information from the November 21, 2014 Letter on cross-examination." App'x 700. Moreover, the court explained that it would "entertain a renewed application" for a "particularized disclosure" of facts relevant to Force's corruption [**60]  if the government's trial tactics or evidence "open[ed] the door" to such facts. Id.



2. Preclusion of Force Investigation Evidence: Rule 6(e)
On appeal, Ulbricht claims that the district court erred in denying his motion to unseal the November 21 letter because he demonstrated a particularized need that rebutted the presumption of secrecy that attaches to grand jury investigations. We disagree.

HN22 "[T]he proper functioning of our grand jury system depends upon the secrecy of grand jury proceedings." Douglas Oil Co. of California v. Petrol Stops Nw., 441 U.S. 211, 218, 99 S. Ct. 1667, 60 L. Ed. 2d 156 (1979). We have described five rationales for such secrecy:

(1) To prevent the escape of those whose indictment may be contemplated; (2) to insure the utmost freedom to the grand jury in its deliberations, and to prevent persons subject to indictment or their friends from importuning the grand jurors; (3) to prevent subornation of perjury or tampering with the witnesses who may testify before the grand jury and later appear at the trial of those indicted by it; (4) to encourage free and untrammeled disclosures by persons who have information with respect to the commission of crimes; (5) to protect the innocent accused who is exonerated from disclosure of the fact that he has been under investigation, and [**61]  from the expense of standing trial where there was no probability of guilt.

In re Grand Jury Subpoena, 103 F.3d 234, 237 (2d Cir. 1996). HN23 Rule 6(e)(6) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure implements this policy of secrecy by requiring  [*107]  that "all records, orders, and subpoenas relating to grand jury proceedings [must] be sealed." In re Grand Jury Subpoena, 103 F.3d at 237 (emphasis in original).
HN24 Information falling within Rule 6(e)'s protections is entitled to a "presumption of secrecy and closure." Id. at 239. To rebut the presumption of secrecy, the party "seeking disclosure [must] show a particularized need that outweighs the need for secrecy." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). To prove a particularized need, parties seeking disclosure must show that the "material they seek is needed to avoid a possible injustice in another judicial proceeding, that the need for disclosure is greater than the need for continued secrecy, and that their request is structured to cover only material so needed." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). "A district court's decision as to whether the burden of showing a particularized interest has been met will be overturned only if the court has abused its discretion." Id.

We cannot say that the district court abused its discretion when it denied Ulbricht's request to unseal the November 21 letter discussing the Force [**62]  grand jury investigation. It is undisputed that the letter contained information related to a grand jury proceeding that, if made public, would disclose matters occurring before the grand jury. Ulbricht did not demonstrate a particularized need for disclosure because he did not show that the need for disclosure was greater than the need for continued secrecy or that a possible injustice would result if the grand jury investigation was not disclosed. Specifically, the district court did not err in concluding that revealing the entire letter could have compromised the Force grand jury investigation in a number of ways. For example, potential co-conspirators might have learned of the investigation and attempted to intimidate witnesses or destroy evidence. The investigation was also likely to garner significant media attention, a fact that might influence witnesses or grand jurors. And, although Force knew of the investigation, revealing its existence to the public might have harmed him if the allegations had ultimately proved untrue. Finally, Ulbricht's request was not structured to cover only the information needed to avoid any possible injustice; instead, he sought to unseal the entire [**63]  November 21 letter and did not propose a more narrowly tailored disclosure.

In redacted portions of its opinion, the district court also considered ex parte arguments concerning how the Force investigation might be relevant to Ulbricht's defense. In general terms, Ulbricht argued that the agents' corruption was critical to his defense because it would reveal the agents' ability to falsify evidence against him and demonstrate their motive to do so. According to the district court's characterization of his ex parte letters, Ulbricht speculated that Force may have used Curtis Green's (Flush) administrative capabilities to impersonate DPR; Force's corrupt conduct might have demonstrated technical vulnerabilities in the site that would render it susceptible to hacking; and learning that Force had good information about the Silk Road investigation might have caused the true DPR to recruit Ulbricht as his successor.41Link to the text of the note

 [*108]  The district court reasoned that much of the information that might have arguably supported any of those theories was made available to the defense in discovery. The only new information in the November 21 letter concerned the investigation of Force's corruption; the fact of [**64]  that investigation and its scope does not bolster any of the defense theories that Ulbricht described before the district court or on appeal. That Force was personally corrupt and used his undercover identity to steal money from Silk Road and DPR does not suggest either a motive or an ability on his part to frame Ulbricht as DPR. Absent any explanation of how Force could have orchestrated a massive plant of incriminating information on Ulbricht's personal laptop, his larcenous behavior does not advance the claim that such a frame-up was possible beyond mere speculation. Thus, Ulbricht was equally capable of presenting his various defense theories to the jury with or without the November 21 letter.42Link to the text of the note

The government's commitment to eliminating all evidence that came from Force's work on the Silk Road investigation43Link to the text of the note further undermines Ulbricht's claim that he needed the information to avoid a possible injustice. Had Force been called as a government witness, or had any of the government's evidence relied on his credibility, his character for truthfulness would have been at issue during the trial, and information that impeached his credibility would have become highly relevant. Ulbricht's [**65]  reliance on the general fact of cooperation among different government agencies and different U.S. Attorney's Offices does not undermine the government's explicit representations that none of the evidence presented at trial derived from Force, and nothing in the record suggests that those representations were false. Ulbricht had no need to rely on the grand jury investigation of Force to attack the credibility of the actual government witnesses or the integrity of its other evidence.

In sum, Ulbricht has not shown that the district court abused its discretion in maintaining the secrecy of the Force grand jury investigation. He did not demonstrate to the district court, and has not demonstrated on appeal, that keeping the November 21 letter under seal resulted in any injustice, or that his need for disclosing the investigation was greater than the need for continued secrecy.44Link to the text of the note



 [*109]  3. Denial of Discovery Related to Force
Ulbricht claims that the district court erred in denying him discovery, including requested subpoenas, related to the Force investigation. HN25 Rule 16(a)(1)(E), Fed. R. Crim. P., requires the government to disclose information within its control if the information is "material to preparing the defense" or will be [**66]  a part of the government's case-in-chief. Evidence is material if it "could be used to counter the government's case or to bolster a defense." United States v. Stevens, 985 F.2d 1175, 1180 (2d Cir. 1993). "An appellate court, in assessing the materiality of withheld information, considers not only the logical relationship between the information and the issues in the case, but also the importance of the information in light of the evidence as a whole." Id. To justify a new trial, there "must be some indication that the pretrial disclosure of the disputed evidence would have enabled the defendant significantly to alter the quantum of proof in his favor." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).

HN26 Rule 17(c), Fed. R. Crim. P., allows parties to subpoena documents and objects to be introduced at criminal trials. A subpoena must meet three criteria: "(1) relevancy; (2) admissibility; [and] (3) specificity." United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 700, 94 S. Ct. 3090, 41 L. Ed. 2d 1039 (1974). The party requesting the subpoena must also show that the information sought is "not otherwise procurable reasonably in advance of trial by exercise of due diligence," that "the party cannot properly prepare for trial without such production," and that "the application is made in good faith and is not intended as a general 'fishing expedition.'" Id. at 699-700. HN27 We review the district [**67]  court's discovery rulings for abuse of discretion. United States v. Rigas, 583 F.3d 108, 125 (2d Cir. 2009).

The district court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Ulbricht's discovery requests related to the Force investigation. Ulbricht submitted 28 individual discovery requests in connection with the Force disclosure. Those ranged from the reasonably specific, such as "records from any and all Bitcoin accounts" used by Force, to the very broad, such as "any spending, net worth, or other financial analysis conducted with respect to former SA Force," "any and all phone records relating to former SA Force," and "bank account records from any and all bank accounts maintained by former SA Force or his spouse." App'x 669-70. The district court concluded that those requests were too broad and unfocused, and that the information requested was not material in the Rule 16 sense because the defense "has not articulated a coherent and particular reason why" the Force investigation could "counter the government's case or bolster a defense." Id. at 697. Next, the district court concluded that the Rule 17 subpoenas were part of the same overall fishing expedition and that the issuance of such subpoenas could compromise the Force grand jury investigation.

There was no [**68]  abuse of discretion in those rulings. Ulbricht has not shown that, had the government produced every piece of requested information, he would have been able to alter the quantum of proof in his favor at trial. That is so because there is no indication, beyond Ulbricht's speculation, that Force manufactured any of the  [*110]  evidence on which the government relied at trial, let alone the most damning evidence discovered on the hard drive on Ulbricht's laptop and at his apartment. Because Force did not testify at trial, information related to his corruption would not have been relevant to attack the credibility of any testimony he would have given. Moreover, Ulbricht has not identified any specific aspect of the trial evidence that he could have undermined using the requested information. Thus, even if the district court erred in not granting at least some of Ulbricht's discovery requests, any such error does not justify a new trial.



4. Ulbricht's Motion to Adjourn the Trial
Ulbricht contends that the district court erred in denying his request to adjourn the trial until the Force investigation was complete. HN28 "[A] district court has a great deal of latitude in scheduling trials." United States v. Griffiths, 750 F.3d 237, 241 (2d Cir. 2014) (internal quotation [**69]  marks omitted). Thus, "trial courts enjoy very broad discretion in granting or denying trial continuances." United States v. Stringer, 730 F.3d 120, 127 (2d Cir. 2013). A decision to grant or deny a request for an adjournment is reviewed for abuse of discretion, and we "will find no such abuse unless the denial was an arbitrary action that substantially impaired the defense." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, the party seeking a continuance has the burden of showing "both arbitrariness and prejudice in order to obtain reversal" based on a denial of an adjournment. Id. at 128 (internal quotation marks omitted).

The district court did not abuse its discretion in denying Ulbricht's request for an adjournment of the trial. In a sealed portion of the proceedings on the first day of trial, the district court explained its reasons for denying the adjournment. The court ruled that because none of the evidence revealed by the government concerning Force's corruption was exculpatory, there was no reason to believe that delaying the trial would assist Ulbricht's defense. That analysis was not irrational or arbitrary. Moreover, as explained in more detail both above and below, Ulbricht has not shown how information related to Force's corruption was either [**70]  exculpatory or material to his defense. Thus, he has not shown that the district court's refusal to adjourn the trial was prejudicial, let alone substantially so.



5. Preclusion of the DeathFromAbove Chats
As already described, Force used DeathFromAbove as an unauthorized Silk Road username through which he attempted to extort money from DPR. The government only learned of Force's activity as DeathFromAbove during trial, when the defense attempted to introduce a redacted chat between DPR and DeathFromAbove. In the chat at issue, DeathFromAbove implied that he knew that DPR's real identity was Anand Athavale. DeathFromAbove then attempted to blackmail DPR by saying that, if DPR gave him $250,000, he would not "give you [sic] identity to law enforcement." App'x 712.

The government objected to admitting the chat on three grounds: (1) it was hearsay; (2) its probative value was substantially outweighed by unfair prejudice under Rule 403, Fed. R. Evid.; and (3) it was a "back-door attempt to re-inject" Force's corruption into the defense's trial evidence. App'x 707. The district court excluded the chat as hearsay. At trial, Ulbricht claimed that the chat was not being offered for its truth, but instead to show its [**71]  effect on DPR; that is, if DPR was actually Athavale, one would expect DPR to take certain steps to protect his identity. The district  [*111]  court disagreed and ruled that the DeathFromAbove chat was hearsay because it was offered for the truth of the matter asserted therein—that government agents at one time thought that Athavale was DPR—and it did not fall into any hearsay exceptions. In the alternative, the district court found that the Athavale-as-DPR theory lacked sufficient support, was speculative, and risked jury confusion.

In general, HN29 hearsay is not admissible unless an exception applies. See Fed. R. Evid. 802. "The Federal Rules of Evidence define hearsay as a declarant's out-of-court statement offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted in the statement." United States v. Dupree, 706 F.3d 131, 136 (2d Cir. 2013) (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted). If "the significance of an offered statement lies solely in the fact that it was made, no issue is raised as to the truth of anything asserted, and the statement is not hearsay." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). HN30 "The trial court's ultimate decisions as to the admission or exclusion of evidence are reviewed for abuse of discretion." Davis v. Velez, 797 F.3d 192, 201 (2d Cir. 2015).

The district court concluded that [**72]  the DeathFromAbove chat was hearsay because it was an out-of-court statement being offered for the truth of the matter asserted therein. That ruling was not an abuse of discretion. Contrary to Ulbricht's assertions on appeal, the district court did not rest its decision on the need for grand jury secrecy to protect the Force investigation. Instead, the decision was a straightforward application of the rule against hearsay.

Ulbricht does not provide any detailed arguments to the contrary that are specific to the DeathFromAbove chat; instead, he discusses the district court's preclusion of all of the evidence related to the Force investigation collectively. At trial, however, he claimed that the statement was offered only to demonstrate "the fact that it was communicated to DPR . . . in that this particular piece of evidence communicates to DPR the name and profile of the person [D]eath[F]rom[A]bove believes is DPR." Tr. 1866. Ulbricht claimed that the statement was "offered for the fact that DPR was getting information about people who were supposed to be DPR," and "one of these people is [Athavale]." Id. at 1867. Once the district court expressed skepticism about his argument, Ulbricht claimed that he sought to admit [**73]  the chat to demonstrate its effect on DPR: "if you're DPR and you get a name . . . this Anand Athavale and a profile and details . . . and you're put on notice that it's you, you're going to take steps." Id. at 1867-68. In other words, Ulbricht claimed that he did not offer it for the truth of the matter asserted in the chat: that agents in the Baltimore investigation, including Force, believed that Athavale was the real Dread Pirate Roberts, or that Athavale was in fact the real DPR.

Ulbricht's proposed non-hearsay use of the chat—to show its effect on DPR—is not sufficiently probative that the evidence's exclusion prejudiced him. The statement does not appear to have had an effect on DPR that would bolster Ulbricht's defense. DPR did not alter his behavior in response to the extortion attempt. Indeed, he referred to it as "bogus" in one of the journal entries discovered on Ulbricht's laptop. App'x 710. If Athavale had been the real Dread Pirate Roberts, he likely would have had a different reaction to the threatened exposure of his identity. DPR's reactions to other attempts to destroy the site's anonymity were dramatic, and included hiring people to kill the users who threatened to compromise [**74]  Silk Road. Therefore, even if Ulbricht did not  [*112]  offer the chat for its truth, any relevance of the arguably non-hearsay use of the statement was entirely too remote to outweigh the possible jury confusion that would result from the injection of Force into the trial or the likelihood that the jury would confuse the hearsay and non-hearsay significance of the evidence.



6. Ulbricht's Rule 33 Motion: Brady v. Maryland
Ulbricht moved for a new trial under Rule 33, Fed. R. Crim. P., raising several issues concerning the unfairness of the assertedly belated disclosures of the investigations into Force and Bridges.45Link to the text of the note The only argument that he pursues in this appeal is that the belated disclosures violated his due process rights under Brady because the information was both material and exculpatory.

HN31 Rule 33(a) provides that, on "the defendant's motion, the court may vacate any judgment and grant a new trial if the interest of justice so requires." We have advised district courts to "exercise Rule 33 authority sparingly and in the most extraordinary circumstances." United States v. Coté, 544 F.3d 88, 101 (2d Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). "Where a defendant's Brady claim was raised in a motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule 33[,] . . . we review the denial of the motion for abuse of discretion." [**75]  United States v. Douglas, 525 F.3d 225, 245 (2d Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). In the context of denying a Rule 33 motion, a "district court abuses . . . the discretion accorded to it when (1) its decision rests on an error of law . . . or a clearly erroneous factual finding, or (2) its decision—though not necessarily the product of a legal error or a clearly erroneous factual finding—cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions." United States v. Forbes, 790 F.3d 403, 406 (2d Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted).

HN32 There are three components of a Brady violation: "(1) The evidence at issue must be favorable to the accused, either because it is exculpatory or because it is impeaching; (2) that evidence must have been suppressed by the [government], either willfully or inadvertently; and (3) prejudice must have ensued." United States v. Certified Envtl. Servs., Inc., 753 F.3d 72, 91 (2d Cir. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted). Information is exculpatory if it relates to the defendant's guilt or innocence. United States v. Avellino, 136 F.3d 249, 255 (2d Cir. 1998). In order to show that he has been prejudiced, a defendant must demonstrate "a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would have been different, such that the failure to disclose undermines confidence in the verdict." Certified Envtl. Servs., Inc., 753 F.3d at 91 (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted). Thus, the prosecution [**76]  "must disclose . . . exculpatory and impeachment information no later than the point at which a reasonable probability will exist that the outcome would have been different if an earlier disclosure had been made." Id. at 92 (internal quotation marks omitted). In general, a "prudent prosecutor will err on the side of transparency, resolving doubtful questions in favor of disclosure." Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. 449, 470 n.15, 129 S. Ct. 1769, 173 L. Ed. 2d 701 (2009).

Although the agents' illegal behavior in connection with the Silk Road investigation is deeply troubling, the government's  [*113]  December 2014 disclosure of the Force investigation and the post-trial disclosure of Bridges's corruption did not violate Ulbricht's due process rights. Evidence concerning the agents' corruption is not Brady information because it is not exculpatory or impeaching of the government's trial evidence. For this reason, the government's failure to reveal the full extent of the investigations until after Ulbricht's trial did not prejudice him. As already explained, the fact that Force purloined Bitcoins from Silk Road and attempted to blackmail DPR does not relate to Ulbricht's guilt or innocence; the same logic applies to Bridges's similar behavior. The agents' corruption has nothing to do with [**77]  whether Ulbricht operated the site as Dread Pirate Roberts. Ulbricht has not raised any credible doubts about the reliability of the evidence that the government presented at trial, nor has he explained why the agents' illegal actions relate to his guilt at all. Indeed, the government removed from its exhibit list the items relevant to Force, including communications between Nob (his authorized undercover username) and DPR. Those communications included an instance in which DPR hired Nob to kill Curtis Green (Flush) as punishment for using his administrator status to steal Bitcoins from Silk Road users. Ulbricht does not identify any particular evidence introduced by the government at trial that is traceable to either Force or Bridges, or the admissibility of which depends on either agent's integrity.

Ulbricht's arguments to the contrary largely rest on speculation. First, Ulbricht contends that the Silk Road investigations occurring in Baltimore and New York were "[c]oordinated and [c]ombined," suggesting that Force's corruption may have somehow infected the evidence that the New York office used in its prosecution. Appellant Br. 40. Ulbricht explains that the offices communicated frequently and shared information [**78]  through emails and reports. Assuming that Ulbricht is correct, the fact that the Silk Road investigation took place in several offices, one of which employed two corrupt agents, does not alter our analysis. Ulbricht still has not shown how the agents' corrupt behavior is exculpatory as to him, even if Force and Bridges at times shared their work product with New York and that work product influenced the larger investigation. The relevant question, on which none of Ulbricht's arguments casts any light or raises any doubt, is whether any particular item of evidence was tainted in some way by the misconduct of Bridges or Force.

Next, Ulbricht surmises that the agents may have fabricated evidence suggesting that Ulbricht was DPR. In so arguing, Ulbricht implies that Force and Bridges may have had sufficiently high-level administrator access to Silk Road to manipulate the "financial, transactional, and communications infrastructure of the Silk Road site." Reply Br. 14. Nothing in the government's disclosures, and nothing that Ulbricht identifies in the record or has produced from any independent source, suggests that either Bridges or Force had such capacity. Absent further detail or evidence [**79]  that Force and Bridges were able to infiltrate DPR's communications or transactions, Ulbricht's argument is simply too speculative to warrant a new trial. Ulbricht further claims that Bridges used sophisticated techniques to try to place blame on others for his corrupt conduct, reflecting a pattern of framing others for his own crimes. That fact alone does not suggest that Bridges fabricated any evidence against Ulbricht or attempted to frame him. That Bridges undertook to deflect blame for things he had done does not suggest any reason why Bridges would be motivated to frame Ulbricht for things that DPR had done. Nor does Ulbricht explain  [*114]  how Bridges's actions should undermine our confidence in any of the specific evidence on which the government relied at trial.46Link to the text of the note

Finally, Ulbricht submitted a supplemental appendix that included a newly-discovered, unredacted report from the Joint Automated Booking System ("JABS").47Link to the text of the note In that report, under the heading "Arrested or Received Information," Force is listed as the officer on the case, and the Baltimore DEA is listed as the relevant agency. Ulbricht apparently means to suggest that this report shows that Force played a more pervasive role in [**80]  the investigation than the government has acknowledged. In response, the government argues that Force was simply the most recent person to make changes to the JABS report by updating it to include information about Ulbricht's family members and the pending charges in Maryland. In any event, the JABS report bearing Force's name does not show how information related to Force's corruption exculpates Ulbricht. It merely confirms that Force was a participant in the Baltimore Silk Road investigation and that he continued to be involved in the case after Ulbricht was arrested. In the face of the entire record of the trial, in which the provenance of the government's evidence was exhaustively displayed without indication that Force was responsible for any of it, this single report has little or no probative value.

In sum, we conclude that the Force and Bridges complaint did not contain Brady information because the agents' corruption does not bear on Ulbricht's guilt or innocence. Thus, any delay in the government's disclosure of their corruption did not violate Ulbricht's due process rights.



B. Preclusion of Defense Experts
The district court precluded both of Ulbricht's proposed expert witnesses [**81]  from testifying because he did not timely or adequately disclose his intent to call them under Rule 16, Fed. R. Crim. P. HN33 In general, the "defendant must, at the government's request, give to the government a written summary of any [expert] testimony that a defendant intends to use. . . . This summary must describe the witness's opinions, the bases and reasons for those opinions, and the witness's qualifications."48Link to the text of the note Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(b)(1)(C). The purpose of the expert disclosure requirement is to "minimize surprise that often results from unexpected expert testimony, reduce the need for continuances, and to provide the opponent with a fair opportunity to test the merit of the expert's testimony through focused cross-examination." Fed. R. Crim. P. 16, advisory committee's note to 1993 amendment. Indeed, "[w]ith increased use of both scientific and nonscientific expert testimony, one of counsel's most basic discovery needs is to learn that an expert is expected to testify." Id.

 [*115]  HN34 If a party fails to comply with Rule 16, the district court has "broad discretion in fashioning a remedy," which may include granting a continuance or "ordering the exclusion of evidence." United States v. Lee, 834 F.3d 145, 158 (2d Cir. 2016) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(d)(2)(A)-(D) (a district court may order "any other [remedy] that is just under [**82]  the circumstances"). We thus review the district court's choice of remedy for abuse of discretion. "In considering whether the district court abused its discretion, we look to the reasons why disclosure was not made, the extent of the prejudice, if any, to the opposing party, the feasibility of rectifying that prejudice by a continuance, and any other relevant circumstances." Lee, 834 F.3d at 159 (internal quotation marks omitted).

The district court did not abuse its discretion in precluding the defense from calling its proposed experts. Not only were the disclosures late, more importantly, they were plainly inadequate. Both disclosures merely listed general and in some cases extremely broad topics on which the experts might opine. For example, the disclosures indicated that the experts would testify on general topics, including: "the origins of Bitcoin," "the various purposes and uses of Bitcoin," "the mechanics of Bitcoin transactions," "the value of Bitcoin over time since its inception," "the concepts of Bitcoin speculating and Bitcoin mining," "[g]eneral principles of internet security and vulnerabilities," the "import of some lines of PHP code provided to defense counsel in discovery," and "[g]eneral principles of [**83]  public-key cryptography," among others. App'x 349, 360. They did not summarize the experts' opinions about those topics, let alone describe the bases for the experts' opinions.

Indeed, although the listed topics certainly pertained generally to Silk Road, the disclosures were so vague that it is difficult to discern whether the proffered expert testimony would have been at all relevant under Rules 401 and 702(a), Fed. R. Evid.49Link to the text of the note In his opposition to the government's motion to preclude Antonopoulos, Ulbricht described the expert's proposed testimony in more detail, but he still did not disclose the opinions that the expert intended to offer. For example, that supplemental disclosure indicated that an "[i]ndependent defense investigation has uncovered that" the government's claim that over 700,000 Bitcoins were transferred to Ulbricht's Bitcoin wallet "is implausible," and the expert would "dispute this finding." App'x 382. Although that is more specific, it is not a summary of Antonopoulos's opinion, nor does it identify the basis for that opinion. Thus, to this day Ulbricht has not described what opinions the experts would offer or explained the methods they used to arrive at any of those conclusions.

The district court also did [**84]  not abuse its discretion in finding that the government would be prejudiced by the belated and inadequate disclosures, in part because the government was due to rest the following day, providing it with no time  [*116]  to prepare to respond to the experts. Moreover, the district court considered intermediate sanctions short of preclusion but found them to be inadequate. In rejecting a continuance as a possible remedy, the district court emphasized the "known issues with a continuance," especially in a lengthy trial. Id. at 369. Two of the jurors had time constraints, and a continuance might have caused the court to lose one or both of those jurors, especially if the continuance was lengthy. If it were to grant a continuance, the court would also need to perform its function as a gatekeeper of expert testimony under HN35 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharms., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 592-93, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993), which requires the district court to make a "preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or methodology underlying the [expert] testimony is scientifically valid" and "can be applied to the facts in issue."50Link to the text of the note The district court cannot perform that complex evaluation of an expert's proposed methodology without a clear articulation of what the expert's opinions are and, even more importantly, [**85]  of the bases for those opinions. In light of the risk of losing jurors and the lack of a sufficiently compelling reason for the defense's clear violation of Rule 16, the district court was within its discretion when it determined that a continuance was not practical and that the appropriate remedy was to preclude the witnesses altogether.

Ulbricht's arguments to the contrary are not persuasive. First, Ulbricht argues that the two experts were necessary to rebut portions of the government's case that he was precluded from addressing during cross-examination, as well as the testimony of Ilhwan Yum, a government witness who analyzed transactions associated with Bitcoin wallets found on Ulbricht's laptop. Ulbricht now contends that portions of Yum's testimony were incorrect, including his description of what a "hot" Bitcoin wallet is.51Link to the text of the note Ulbricht does not, however, explain how Yum's testimony was incorrect, what contrary evidence his experts would have provided had they been allowed to testify, or how any purported correction of Yum's testimony would have affected the case against Ulbricht. Nor has he produced any summaries of his proposed expert testimony or described how [**86]  that testimony would have been material to Ulbricht's guilt or innocence. In other words, Ulbricht has not shown that precluding Bellovin and Antonopoulos from testifying prejudiced him. Ulbricht's alternative argument that the  [*117]  disclosures were in fact adequate is incorrect for the reasons already explained.

Ulbricht next argues that preclusion was an unduly harsh remedy under the circumstances. Along those lines, he claims that certain exhibits, such as the summary chart on which Yum relied, were not produced until mid-trial. Thus, according to Ulbricht, he could not have known about his need for expert witnesses to counter specific trial exhibits until it was already too late to comply with Rule 16. In his view, the district court should not have held him so strictly to Rule 16's requirements because he could not have known until Yum testified that he would need to call an expert.

While Ulbricht is correct that excluding his experts was a harsh sanction and was not to be imposed lightly, the district court considered the possibility of granting a continuance or a more limited sanction and found those remedies [**87]  to be inappropriate under the circumstances. Such HN37 careful consideration of a range of possible sanctions short of preclusion is especially important in the atypical case where a criminal defendant, rather than the government, is precluded from putting on his case because of a Rule 16 violation. Limiting the defense's presentation of his case implicates the fundamental right of "an accused to present witnesses in his own defense." Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284, 302, 93 S. Ct. 1038, 35 L. Ed. 2d 297 (1973). However, the defendant must still "comply with established rules of procedure and evidence designed to assure both fairness and reliability in the ascertainment of guilt and innocence." Id. Here, Ulbricht did not comply with the procedural requirements associated with expert disclosures. The district court gave the issue due consideration and appropriately exercised its discretion in remedying the defense's Rule 16 violation.

Finally, Ulbricht cannot credibly argue that Yum's testimony was the first notice he had about the possible need for an expert witness to testify as part of his affirmative case. The Silk Road prosecution was uniquely laden with issues related to technology, computer servers, forensics, cyber security, digital currency, and myriad other issues that [**88]  are indisputably "beyond the ken of the average juror." United States v. Mejia, 545 F.3d 179, 191 (2d Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). Ulbricht surely knew from the outset that, in order to mount a meaningful attack on the government's voluminous and technically complex evidence, he would need to call his own expert. Indeed, in his opening statement, Ulbricht's counsel claimed that he would show that the Bitcoins in Ulbricht's wallet were from innocent transactions associated with Bitcoin speculation, rather than, as the government contended, related to Silk Road.52Link to the text of the note Ulbricht's opening statement also implied that BitTorrent's53Link to the text of the note security deficiencies could have allowed the true DPR to plant incriminating evidence on his laptop. It is difficult to fathom how he planned to advance those theories without relying on expert testimony.

 [*118]  In short, Ulbricht argues that the district court's preclusion of his proffered expert witnesses denied him a fair opportunity to present his defense. But the same failings that render Ulbricht's expert disclosures inadequate under Rule 16 preclude us from finding the kind of prejudice he asserts. Ulbricht did not disclose to the district court, and has not presented [**89]  on appeal, any explanation of what the proposed experts would have said that would have supported a nonspeculative basis for doubting the probative value of evidence from a variety of electronic and other sources identifying Ulbricht as DPR throughout the life of Silk Road. Thus, we cannot conclude that he was prejudiced by the experts' exclusion.



C. Curtailing Cross-Examination
Ulbricht contends that the district court erred in limiting his ability to cross-examine two government witnesses: Der-Yeghiayan and Kiernan. HN38 "We review a trial court's decision to limit the scope of cross-examination for abuse of discretion." United States v. Cedeño, 644 F.3d 79, 81 (2d Cir. 2011). HN39 "A district court is accorded broad discretion in controlling the scope and extent of cross-examination." United States v. James, 712 F.3d 79, 103 (2d Cir. 2013) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Fed. R. Evid. 611(a). Thus, "a district court may impose reasonable limits on cross-examination to protect against, e.g., harassment, prejudice, confusion, and waste." James, 712 F.3d at 103 (internal quotation marks omitted). In general, however, a "district court should afford wide latitude to a defendant in a criminal case to cross-examine government witnesses." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). That is so because the Confrontation Clause gives "a defendant the right not only [**90]  to cross-examination, but to effective cross-examination." Id. "[I]t does not follow, of course, that the Confrontation Clause prevents a trial judge from imposing any limits" on defense counsel's cross-examination of government witnesses. Id. (emphasis in original).



1. Agent Der-Yeghiayan
Ulbricht argues that the district court erred when it struck portions of Der-Yeghiayan's testimony that referenced his prior belief that Karpeles might be Dread Pirate Roberts. Ulbricht also challenges the striking of a similar but analytically distinct piece of testimony: Der-Yeghiayan's statement that Karpeles's attorney had offered information about Silk Road in exchange for Karpeles receiving immunity from prosecution. Ulbricht wanted the jury to infer that Karpeles had some criminal involvement in Silk Road that motivated him to pursue a cooperation agreement with the government.

Der-Yeghiayan answered the defendant's initial questions about those topics, and the government did not object to them until a later side bar. During the side bar, the district court expressed its initial view that the questions were proper, but requested written briefing on the subject. After reviewing the parties' submissions, the district [**91]  court agreed with the government that neither Der-Yeghiayan's prior opinions about whether Karpeles was DPR nor Karpeles's offer of information about Silk Road was relevant to Ulbricht's case. The court thus directed the government to identify portions of Der-Yeghiayan's testimony to strike. After the government identified the improper testimony, the district court gave a general limiting instruction to the jury:

You heard testimony while Mr. Der-Yeghiayan was on the stand regarding personal beliefs or suspicions he may have had about particular individuals at various points during his investigation. And I instruct you that what the agent suspected  [*119]  about others isn't evidence and should be disregarded. Now, consistent with all of the instructions I'm going to give you at the end of the case, there was other testimony that Mr. Der-Yeghiayan provided which you may consider during your deliberations and give it the weight that you deem that it deserves. So it's the suspicions, all right?

Tr. 974. Ulbricht contends on appeal that the district court erred in striking the testimony.
We disagree. The district court did not err in concluding that Der-Yeghiayan's prior beliefs about Karpeles as [**92]  a possible DPR suspect were not relevant to the charges against Ulbricht. HN40 In order to elicit testimony implicating an alternative perpetrator, a defendant "must show that his proffered evidence on the alleged alternative perpetrator is sufficient, on its own or in combination with other evidence in the record, to show a nexus between the crime charged and the asserted alternative perpetrator." Wade v. Mantello, 333 F.3d 51, 61-62 (2d Cir. 2003) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, to avoid a "grave risk of jury confusion," a defendant must offer more than "unsupported speculation that another person may have done the crime." Id. at 62 (internal quotation marks omitted). An "agent's state of mind as the investigation progressed is ordinarily of little or no relevance to the question of the defendant['s] guilt." United States v. Johnson, 529 F.3d 493, 501 (2d Cir. 2008). Thus, striking Der-Yeghiayan's testimony and instructing the jury to disregard his earlier opinions about Karpeles's possible guilt was not error.54Link to the text of the note

Further, any arguable error that occurred was harmless. Defense counsel continued to cross-examine Der-Yeghiayan and elicited admissible testimony about the earlier investigation into Karpeles; indeed, the district court took over cross-examination at several points to assist the defense [**93]  in asking proper questions. Cf. Cotto v. Herbert, 331 F.3d 217, 254 (2d Cir. 2003) (in considering whether a Confrontation Clause violation is harmless, we consider, inter alia, "the extent of cross-examination otherwise permitted"). Moreover, Ulbricht discussed the investigation of Karpeles in his summation without objection. What was relevant at trial was any actual evidence pointing to Karpeles as the true Dread Pirate Roberts. The district court did not limit Ulbricht's cross-examination of Der-Yeghiayan as to his knowledge of such evidence. The district court directed the jury to disregard only testimony as to the agent's "suspicions," Tr. 974, a subject of "little or no relevance to . . . the defendant['s] guilt," Johnson, 529 F.3d at 501.

We similarly reject Ulbricht's contention that striking Der-Yeghiayan's testimony concerning Karpeles's offer to provide information about Silk Road in exchange for immunity was an abuse of discretion. Absent other evidence in the record regarding Karpeles, it was proper to exclude wholly speculative suggestions of an alternative perpetrator defense based on Karpeles's attorney's offer of information in exchange for his client's immunity.  [*120]  And even assuming, arguendo, that the district court erred in striking the testimony, any error [**94]  was harmless. To the extent this testimony was stricken from the trial record, that ruling occurred outside the presence of the jury. All the jury was told was to disregard testimony about "what the agent suspected about others," Tr. 974, a category that hardly would be understood by the jury to encompass testimony about the actions of Karpeles's attorney. As explained in detail above, moreover, the evidence identifying Ulbricht as Dread Pirate Roberts was overwhelming and largely unchallenged. That Karpeles may have had information about Silk Road does not imply that he was DPR, only that he had some knowledge of or involvement with the site. Particularly given that Karpeles likely had some knowledge about Silk Road simply because of his operation of Mt. Gox, a prominent Bitcoin exchanger, any marginal probative value in the fact that he claimed to have such knowledge, and offered to provide it to the government, could not have meaningfully affected the balance of evidence available to the jury regarding the identity of DPR.



2. Agent Kiernan
Defense counsel cross-examined Kiernan extensively, and Ulbricht contends on appeal that the district court erred in preventing him from exploring [**95]  certain topics during that cross-examination. Those excluded topics include: the meaning of various acronyms, the significance of a certain line of PHP code,55Link to the text of the note whether the FBI allowed Kiernan to run BitTorrent on his work computer despite its lack of security, and whether the Linux kernel56Link to the text of the note that Kiernan used on his work computer was the same as the one that Ulbricht installed on his laptop. Ulbricht explains that he was attempting to show that Kiernan's conclusions about Ulbricht's laptop were inaccurate because they were based on unreliable information.

The district court sustained objections to those questions because, in its view, they were outside the scope of Kiernan's direct testimony. See Fed. R. Evid. 611(b) ("Cross-examination should not go beyond the subject matter of the direct examination and matters affecting the witness's credibility."); Baker v. Goldman Sachs & Co., 669 F.3d 105, 110 (2d Cir. 2012) (HN42 "Once any direct examination is concluded, cross-examination within the scope of the direct follows.").

On appeal, Ulbricht claims that, because Kiernan testified about the operation of Tor Chat and other forensic computer issues during his direct testimony, the precluded questions were within that testimony's scope and should have been allowed. Even assuming [**96]  that Ulbricht is correct, any error is harmless. Ulbricht was permitted to question Kiernan about whether Linux was customizable, and Kiernan admitted during cross that he did not know whether he used the same version of Tor Chat that Ulbricht had installed on his laptop. Ulbricht's counsel also asked several questions about the security vulnerabilities of BitTorrent, conveying to the jury that using BitTorrent might have rendered Ulbricht's computer susceptible to hacking. Thus, Ulbricht was able to elicit testimony supporting his proposed inference that Kiernan's conclusions based on the Tor Chat evidence were flawed. Ulbricht does not explain how he was prejudiced  [*121]  when the district court prohibited him from asking Kiernan certain other questions. We therefore identify no reversible error in the district court's limitations on Kiernan's cross examination.



D. Andrew Jones Hearsay Statement
The district court excluded a statement allegedly made by Andrew Jones, who was a Silk Road administrator under the username Inigo. Jones cooperated with the government and was on the government's witness list until the middle of trial, when the government decided not to call him. Defense counsel [**97]  explored the possibility of calling Jones as a witness, but Jones's attorney advised Ulbricht that Jones would invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to testify if compelled to appear. In light of Jones's unavailability, Ulbricht sought to admit a December 29, 2014 letter from the government to defense counsel that described a statement that Jones made during one of his interviews.57Link to the text of the note The relevant portion of the government's letter is as follows:

At some point in or about August or September 2013, Jones tried to authenticate that the Silk Road user "Dread Pirate Roberts" whom he was talking to at the time . . . was the same person with whom he had been communicating in the past with this username. Previously, . . . Jones and "Dread Pirate Roberts" had agreed upon a "handshake" to use for authentication, in which Jones would provide a certain prompt and "Dread Pirate Roberts" would provide a certain response. When, during the 2013 chat in question, Jones provided what he believed to be the designated prompt, "Dread Pirate Roberts" was unable to provide the response Jones thought they had agreed on. However, later in the chat, Jones asked "Dread Pirate Roberts" to validate himself by specifying the first [**98]  job that "Dread Pirate Roberts" assigned to him (running the "DPR Book Club"), which "Dread Pirate Roberts" was able to do.

App'x 398. Ulbricht argues that the Jones statement58Link to the text of the note supports his theory that more than one person acted as Dread Pirate Roberts, because at one point DPR could authenticate his identity to Jones, but at another time he could not.
When it became clear that Jones was unavailable to testify, Ulbricht asked the government to stipulate that the Jones statement could be read to the jury. The government initially agreed, but then changed its mind and opposed admitting the Jones statement. The defense acknowledged that the statement was hearsay, but claimed that it was admissible under two hearsay exceptions: under Rule 804(b)(3), Fed. R. Evid., as a statement against interest, and under Rule 807's residual exception. The district court ruled that the statement was inadmissible, specifically addressing only Rule 804(b)(3). On appeal, Ulbricht continues to argue that the statement was admissible under either exception. Neither of his theories is persuasive.59Link to the text of the note

 [*122]  HN44 A district court's "ultimate decisions as to the admission or exclusion of evidence are reviewed for abuse of discretion, and will not be disturbed unless they are [**99]  manifestly erroneous." Davis, 797 F.3d at 201 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). HN45 To invoke the 804(b)(3) exception for a statement against interest, the proponent of the statement "must show (1) that the declarant is unavailable as a witness, (2) that the statement is sufficiently reliable to warrant an inference that a reasonable man in [the declarant's] position would not have made the statement unless he believed it to be true, and (3) that corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement." United States v. Wexler, 522 F.3d 194, 202 (2d Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). The exception applies "only if the district court determines that a reasonable person in the declarant's shoes would perceive the statement as detrimental to his or her own penal interest." United States v. Saget, 377 F.3d 223, 231 (2d Cir. 2004). The key to this inquiry is whether the statement is sufficiently "self-inculpatory," which the district court must evaluate on a "case-by-case basis." United States v. Williams, 506 F.3d 151, 155 (2d Cir. 2007).

The district court did not err in concluding that the Jones statement did not fall within Rule 804(b)(3)'s hearsay exception. There is no dispute that Jones was unavailable to testify because he planned to invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege. The court ruled that the Rule 804(b)(3) exception did not apply because Jones was under a cooperation [**100]  agreement at the time that he made the relevant statement to the government and the chat did not have any particular impact on Jones's penal interests. On appeal, Ulbricht claims that the extent of Jones's criminal liability was unknown when he made the statement because he could still be vulnerable to prosecution in other jurisdictions, and he had not yet been sentenced when he made the statement to the government. See Mitchell v. United States, 526 U.S. 314, 326, 119 S. Ct. 1307, 143 L. Ed. 2d 424 (1999) (HN46in the Fifth Amendment context, there can be a "legitimate fear of adverse consequences from further testimony" where a sentence has not yet been imposed).

We are not persuaded that Jones's statement was against his penal interests. Given the cooperation agreement, the government's role at Jones's future sentencing, and the penalties for lying to the government, it is far from clear that it was against Jones's interest to disclose details of his criminal activities at the time the statement in question was made. Moreover, even to the extent that Jones's disclosures taken as a whole constituted inculpatory admissions, the particular statement in question had little adverse effect on Jones. Jones's inculpatory admissions to the government concern whether he committed crimes connected [**101]  to Silk Road. His description of his "handshake" with DPR presupposes that he had already discussed his own crimes with the government. Whether DPR did or did not recognize Jones's identifying prompt does not bear on Jones's guilt of any crime associated with the site, since he had already confirmed his role working for DPR. The details of this conversation with DPR thus do not inculpate Jones; instead, they either help or hurt Ulbricht. Accordingly, the district court did not abuse its discretion in holding that Rule 804(b)(3) does not apply.

 [*123]  HN47 Rule 807 provides for a limited, residual exception to the rule against hearsay where no other exception applies. A hearsay statement may be admissible under Rule 807 if: "(i) it is particularly trustworthy; (ii) it bears on a material fact; (iii) it is the most probative evidence addressing that fact; (iv) its admission is consistent with the rules of evidence and advances the interests of justice; and (v) its proffer follows adequate notice to the adverse party." United States v. Morgan, 385 F.3d 196, 208 (2d Cir. 2004) (internal quotation marks omitted). The "residual hearsay exception[] will be used very rarely, and only in exceptional circumstances." Parsons v. Honeywell, Inc., 929 F.2d 901, 907 (2d Cir. 1991) (internal quotation marks omitted).

The district court did not specifically [**102]  address Ulbricht's request to admit the statement under Rule 807, but we conclude that the limited residual exception does not assist Ulbricht. We are loath to assume that a statement made by a criminal in debriefings to the government pursuant to a cooperation agreement is categorically "particularly trustworthy," as Rule 807 requires. But even if Jones's statement meets that criterion, and was offered "as evidence of a material fact," we cannot say that it is "more probative on the point for which it is offered than any other evidence that the proponent can obtain through reasonable efforts." Fed. R. Evid. 807(a)(2)-(3). Ulbricht has not attempted to explain how the Jones statement satisfies this requirement.

Finally, even if the district court erred in excluding the statement under either hearsay exception, any error was certainly harmless. The conversation between Jones and DPR in its totality was not actually helpful to Ulbricht. As explained, during the chat in question, DPR was at one point unable to provide the designated response, but later he identified himself to Jones's satisfaction. The statement thus contains the seeds of its own refutation. Since DPR's alleged failure to verify his identity and his subsequent [**103]  remedy of that failure occurred during the same online chat, the interaction provides little or no support for the defense theory that different individuals acted as DPR at different times.



E. Cumulative Error
Ulbricht argues that the cumulative effect of the district court's evidentiary rulings deprived him of a fair trial. See United States v. Al-Moayad, 545 F.3d 139, 178 (2d Cir. 2008). We have exhaustively reviewed his contentions of trial error and have concluded that none of those contentions has merit. The challenged trial rulings were well within the district court's discretion, and the various exclusions did not prevent the defense from offering evidence probative of innocence. At the trial in this case, the government presented overwhelming evidence that Ulbricht was indeed Dread Pirate Roberts. The evidence that the defense was precluded from offering to refute that proof was excluded because it was speculative, unreliable, offered in contravention of the Federal Rules of Evidence or of Criminal Procedure, or otherwise inadmissible. The few instances in which the district court's rulings may be questioned, where we noted the relevance of the harmless error rule, involved minor and marginal points. Accordingly, whether considered separately [**104]  or cumulatively, none of Ulbricht's evidentiary arguments lead us to doubt that he was found guilty after a fair trial.



III. Sentencing
HN48 "[A] district court has broad latitude to impose either a Guidelines sentence or a non-Guidelines sentence." Rigas,  [*124]  583 F.3d at 114 (internal quotation marks omitted). "Accordingly, the role of the Court of Appeals is limited to examining a sentence for reasonableness, which is akin to review under an 'abuse-of-discretion' standard." Id. "This standard applies both to the [substantive reasonableness of the] sentence itself and to the procedures employed in arriving at the sentence." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). Ulbricht and amici60Link to the text of the note challenge his life sentence as both procedurally and substantively unreasonable.



A. Procedural Reasonableness
HN49 "A sentence is procedurally unreasonable if the district court fails to calculate (or improperly calculates) the Sentencing Guidelines range, treats the Sentencing Guidelines as mandatory, fails to consider the § 3553(a) factors, selects a sentence based on clearly erroneous facts, or fails adequately to explain the chosen sentence." United States v. Jesurum, 819 F.3d 667, 670 (2d Cir. 2016) (internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted). To "hold that a factual finding is 'clearly erroneous,' [**105]  we must be left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." United States v. DeSilva, 613 F.3d 352, 356 (2d Cir. 2010). Where "there are two permissible views of the evidence, the factfinder's choice between them cannot be clearly erroneous." United States v. Norman, 776 F.3d 67, 76 (2d Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted). In general, a "sentencing court has discretion to consider a wide range of information in arriving at an appropriate sentence." United States v. Prescott, 920 F.2d 139, 143 (2d Cir. 1990). "The district court's factual findings at sentencing need be supported only by a preponderance of the evidence." Norman, 776 F.3d at 76. "Where we identify procedural error in a sentence, but the record indicates clearly that the district court would have imposed the same sentence in any event, the error may be deemed harmless, avoiding the need to vacate the sentence and to remand the case for resentencing." United States v. Jass, 569 F.3d 47, 68 (2d Cir 2009) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also United States v. Cavera, 550 F.3d 180, 197 (2d Cir. 2008) (en banc) (declining to reach claim that district court erred in relying on vague concern about gun violence because it was clear that the "district court would have imposed the same sentence had it relied solely on" the permissible concern about deterrence).

Ulbricht's only claim of procedural error is that it was improper for the district court to consider six drug-related deaths [**106]  as relevant to his sentence because there was insufficient information connecting them with drugs purchased on Silk Road. In terms of our sentencing jurisprudence, Ulbricht claims that the district court relied on clearly erroneous facts in imposing sentence. We are not persuaded.

Ulbricht submitted an expert report in which Dr. Mark Taff wrote that the records associated with the six deaths were substantially incomplete. For example, many did not include full autopsies, rendering it difficult to discern the precise cause of death to a reasonable degree of medical certainty in five of the cases.61Link to the text of the note  [*125]  Equally importantly, Dr. Taff wrote that he could not conclusively connect the specific drugs that the decedents consumed with Silk Road, because it is impossible to "correlate the time of purchase/acquisition from an alleged Silk Road vendor" and the "time of usage of the alleged Silk road purchase" with the deaths.62Link to the text of the note S.A. 446. We assume for purposes of this opinion that Dr. Taff's conclusions are sufficiently sound to raise a genuine question about whether the deaths described in the PSR were caused by drugs purchased on Silk Road. As explained above, however, Ulbricht was not being prosecuted [**107]  or punished for homicide on a theory that he personally caused those deaths. Nor did the fact of the deaths increase his offense level under the Guidelines. The question before the district court was whether the sale of large quantities of drugs on Silk Road created a sufficient risk of death to permit the district court to take the deaths into account in assessing the seriousness of Ulbricht's crimes when it considered the factors listed in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).

As with other facts relevant to sentencing, that question is for the district court to answer, based on the preponderance of the evidence. Norman, 776 F.3d at 76. Contrary to Ulbricht's claims, the district court did not summarily reject Dr. Taff's conclusions. Rather, it addressed his report carefully and acknowledged the evidentiary challenges of connecting the deaths to Silk Road. The court concluded that Dr. Taff's proposed "reasonable degree of medical certainty" standard was simply too high an evidentiary standard for purposes of including the deaths in the PSR. The court reasoned that it was "not asking whether the but for cause of death is drugs purchased on Silk Road," but rather "whether there is a connection between the purchase of drugs on Silk Road [**108]  and [the] death" in the sense that the sale of those drugs created a risk of death. App'x 1476.

For those limited purposes and judged by that standard, the circumstantial evidence connecting the drug-related deaths to Silk Road was sufficient to consider them at Ulbricht's sentencing. To take the strongest example, one decedent was found in his apartment with a package torn open. His computer had the Silk Road site open, with chat messages from the vendor describing the heroin and prescription drug purchase as well as the package tracking information. The tracking number matched the information on the torn package in the apartment. A toxicology report determined that he died of an overdose of heroin combined with other prescription drugs. The facts connecting the other five deaths to Silk Road varied in strength. The available evidence was sufficient, however, to allow the district court find by a preponderance of the evidence that the deaths were connected to Silk Road; therefore, the court could consider the risk of death that the site created. Nothing in the sentencing transcript suggests that the court considered the information for any other purpose.

We are sensitive to the possibility [**109]  that the evidence of the six deaths was emotionally  [*126]  inflammatory and risked implicitly escalating Ulbricht's responsibility from facilitating the sale of drugs to causing the deaths of several drug users.63Link to the text of the note But there is no indication that the deaths in question played such a role in the district court's sentencing determination. In urging the court to consider evidence of the deaths, the government explained that the deaths "illustrate the obvious: that drugs can cause serious harm, including death." App'x 902. See United States v. Pacheco, 489 F.3d 40, 48 n.5 (1st Cir. 2007) (observing that a defendant who "engaged in the commercial trade of potent substances . . . must have known [that such trade] could have dire consequences").

Of course, to the extent that the harms of the drug trade were obvious, there was no need to introduce evidence of these particular incidents, let alone to hammer the point home with unavoidably emotional victim impact statements by parents of two of the decedents.64Link to the text of the note No federal judge needs to be reminded of the tragic consequences of the traffic in dangerous substances on the lives of users and addicts, or of the risks of overdose and other ramifications of the most dangerous of illegal drugs. Those consequences are among [**110]  the reasons why illegal drugs are prohibited and constitute a principal justification advanced for the extremely lengthy sentences provided by federal statutes and sentencing guidelines for trafficking in illicit substances. Absent reason to believe that a drug dealer's methods were unusually reckless, in that they enhanced the risk of death from drugs he sold beyond those already inherent in the trade, we do not think that the fact that the ever-present risk of tragedy came to fruition in a particular instance should enhance those sentences, or that the inability of the government to link a particular dealer's product to a specific death should mitigate them. The government's insistence on proceeding with this evidence generated an appellate issue that has taken on a disproportionate focus in relation to the reasons actually advanced by the district court in its lengthy and careful statement of the reasons for the sentence it imposed. App'x 1509-41.

We are not persuaded, however, that the introduction of the evidence in this case was error, although it may have been incautious for the government to insist on presenting it to the district court. As already explained, it was certainly [**111]  appropriate for the district court to consider the risk of death from use of drugs in assessing the seriousness of the offense conduct, one of the factors that a judge must consider in imposing sentence. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A). That appears to be the only way the judge in this case used the evidence of the drug-related deaths. Emotionally wrenching as the statements of the decedents' parents were, we cannot and do not assume that federal judges are unable to put their sympathies for particular victims to one side and assess the evidence for its rational relationship to the sentencing decision. And here, the record makes clear that the district court did not use the evidence of the drug-related deaths to enhance Ulbricht's sentence, either as a formal matter under the Guidelines or otherwise. For all the extensive litigation of the  [*127]  propriety of including this information in the PSR, in imposing sentence the district court did not refer to the drug-related deaths as an aggravating factor. Indeed, the only mention of that evidence at all was a passing reference to "facts brought out in connection with [those] death[s]" that "provide evidence of first-time and expanded [drug] usage." App'x 1521-22. This reference [**112]  occurred in the entirely appropriate context of a lengthy discussion of the general social harms of Ulbricht's massive drug-trading marketplace. Id. at 1522-28.

That discussion was particularly germane to this case for several reasons. First, Ulbricht claimed that Silk Road reduced the harms associated with the drug trade in several ways. For example, he argued that trafficking in drugs over the Internet reduced violence associated with hand-to-hand transactions and the societal stigma of drug use, and Silk Road's vendor rating system ensured that customers had access to better quality drugs and more information about the drugs that they were purchasing. Those arguments prompted the district court to reflect broadly on the costs of the drug trade and discuss Silk Road's participation in those harms. Reasonable people may and do disagree about the social utility of harsh sentences for the distribution of controlled substances, or even of criminal prohibition of their sale and use at all. It is very possible that, at some future point, we will come to regard these policies as tragic mistakes and adopt less punitive and more effective methods of reducing the incidence and costs of drug use.

At this point [**113]  in our history, however, the democratically-elected representatives of the people have opted for a policy of prohibition, backed by severe punishment. That policy results in the routine incarceration of many traffickers for extended periods of time. This case involves a defendant who stood at one remove from the trade, who did not for the most part dirty his hands with the actual possession and sale of drugs and other contraband that his site offered. But he did take a cut of the proceeds, in exchange for making it easier for such drugs to be purchased and sold, in a way that may well have expanded the market by allowing more people access to drugs in greater quantities than might otherwise have been available to them. In the routine instances of sentencing drug sellers, the dangerous aspects of the trade are close to the surface and require little emphasis. In this case, a reminder of the consequences of facilitating such transactions was perhaps more necessary, particularly because Ulbricht claimed that his site actually made the drug trade safer, and he appeared to contest the legitimacy of the laws he violated.65Link to the text of the note

 [*128]  Finally, we need look no further than the district court's express [**114]  reasons for imposing sentence to conclude that drug-related deaths played little part in dictating the sentence imposed. As tragic as they are, and as foreseeable in light of the volume of dangerous drugs trafficked through Silk Road, those deaths were accidents. In light of the overwhelming evidence, discussed below, that Ulbricht was prepared, like other drug kingpins, to protect his profits by paying large sums of money to have individuals who threatened his enterprise murdered, it would be plainly wrong to conclude that he was sentenced for accidental deaths that the district court discussed only in passing in imposing sentence. Even were we to conclude that the evidence of the Silk Road-related deaths should not have been received, any error would be harmless, because the record is absolutely clear that the district court, after finding that Ulbricht commissioned five murders, would have imposed the same sentence if the evidence of the drug-related deaths had been excluded.

The sentencing amici advance one additional argument: that the district court's consideration of the drug-related deaths violated the Fifth and Sixth Amendments because the fact of those deaths was not charged in the Indictment [**115]  and proven to the jury. "While HN50 we are not required to address arguments raised only by an amicus," Am. Atheists, Inc. v. Port Auth. of N.Y. & New Jersey, 760 F.3d 227, 237 n.11 (2d Cir. 2014), we do so here in an excess of caution. The argument is without merit under Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S. Ct. 2348, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435 (2000), and its progeny.

HN51 A district court may consider as part of its sentencing determination uncharged conduct proven by a preponderance of the evidence as long as that conduct does not increase either the statutory minimum or maximum available punishment. See United States v. Stevenson, 834 F.3d 80, 85 (2d Cir. 2016); United States v. Ryan, 806 F.3d 691, 693-94 (2d Cir. 2015). The Supreme Court has "long recognized that broad sentencing discretion, informed by judicial factfinding, does not violate the Sixth Amendment." Alleyne v. United States, 133 S. Ct. 2151, 2163, 186 L. Ed. 2d 314 (2013). Here, the six drug-related deaths (and more importantly, Ulbricht's attempted murders for hire) were uncharged facts that did not increase either the statutory twenty-year minimum or the maximum life sentence applicable to the crimes of which he was found guilty, beyond a reasonable doubt, by the jury. Thus, the district court did not violate the Constitution when it found by a preponderance of the evidence that the six deaths were connected to Silk Road and that they were relevant to Ulbricht's sentence because they were part of the harm that the site caused.

In sum, we might not, in the prosecutors' shoes, have chosen to offer [**116]  this evidence at sentencing, or have admitted it as district judges. We conclude, however, (1) that the district court did not clearly err  [*129]  when it found by a preponderance of the evidence that the six deaths were connected to Silk Road; (2) that it did not abuse its discretion in determining that it was appropriate to consider those acts as bearing on the seriousness of the narcotics offenses of which Ulbricht was convicted, one of many factors the district court was required to consider in exercising its discretion under § 3553(a); and (3) that the evidence in question in fact played a minimal role, if any, in the actual sentencing, and that in light of the reasons given by the district court for its sentencing decision, we can be absolutely certain that the same sentence would have been imposed if the evidence had not been received. Ulbricht's sentence was therefore not procedurally unreasonable.



B. Substantive Unreasonableness
HN52 "We will . . . set aside a district court's substantive [sentencing] determination only in exceptional cases where the trial court's decision cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions." Cavera, 550 F.3d at 189 (emphasis and internal quotation marks omitted). Our review is [**117]  "deferential," and this Court does "not consider what weight we would ourselves have given a particular factor." Rigas, 583 F.3d at 122. "Rather, we consider whether the factor, as explained by the district court, can bear the weight assigned it under the totality of the circumstances in the case." Id. Our role in "patrolling the boundaries of reasonableness" is modest. United States v. Broxmeyer, 699 F.3d 265, 289 (2d Cir. 2012) (alterations and internal quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, we "will set aside only those outlier sentences that reflect actual abuse of a district court's considerable sentencing discretion." United States v. Messina, 806 F.3d 55, 66 (2d Cir. 2015).

In light of the deferential standard of review, we cannot say that Ulbricht's life sentence was substantively unreasonable. The district court identified numerous facts that made Ulbricht's case extraordinary, in its view rendering a life sentence "sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes" of sentencing. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). The court described the crime as a "planned, comprehensive, and deliberate scheme . . . which posed serious danger to public health and to our communities." App'x 1511-12. Silk Road was a "worldwide criminal drug enterprise with a massive geographic scope." Id. at 1512. The fact that Ulbricht operated the site from behind [**118]  a computer, rather than in person like a more prototypical drug kingpin, does not make his crime less serious or less dangerous. Moreover, Silk Road uniquely expanded the drug market by providing an easy avenue for people to become first-time drug users and dealers. Because drugs were shipped to customers in the mail, Silk Road brought "drugs to communities that previously may have had no access to such drugs . . . in such quantities." Id. at 1522.

The quantity and nature of the drugs sold on Silk Road are staggering. According to the PSR, from 2011 through 2013, Silk Road customers transacted in approximately $183 million worth of illegal drugs. At the time the government shut down Silk Road on October 2, 2013, there were approximately 13,802 listings for controlled substances on the website. Of those listings, there were 643 listings for cocaine-based products, 305 for LSD products, and 261 for methamphetamine products. The drugs were sold mostly for individual, personal use, but some drugs such as heroin and cocaine were also available in "multi-kilogram quantities." PSR ¶ 26. The available drugs were not limited to heroin, narcotics, synthetic marijuana, and other dangerous but recreational [**119]  substances. For  [*130]  example, after being told that cyanide was "the most well known assassination suicide [sic] poison out there," Ulbricht allowed vendors to sell it on Silk Road despite its singular, deadly purpose. App'x 1519. As the district court noted, despite earlier protestations that Silk Road would not allow the sale of products that could be used to inflict deliberate harm on others, it took Ulbricht all of six minutes to decide "that it is okay to sell cyanide," id., in exchange for the customary cut of the proceeds.

The drug offenses alone—ignoring all other illicit materials sold on the site66Link to the text of the note—yielded a calculated offense level of 50. Of that calculation, only two levels are attributable to Ulbricht's "credible threats of directed violence" associated with the murders for hire. PSR ¶ 94. Thus, even without considering that enhancement, the drug convictions yielded an offense level of 48, which is higher than the maximum offense level recognized by the Guidelines, for which a sentence of life imprisonment is recommended even for someone who, like Ulbricht, has no prior criminal convictions. Ulbricht does not challenge the accuracy of the Guidelines calculation or of the fact-findings [**120]  on which it is based.

HN53 That the sentence imposed accorded with the Guidelines recommendation does not automatically render it reasonable. See United States v. Dorvee, 616 F.3d 174, 182 (2d Cir. 2010). The Guidelines are, however, themselves a factor that Congress has directed district courts to consider. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(4)(A). Moreover, as the considered judgment of the United States Sentencing Commission, they bear on the other factors that Congress has required courts to evaluate, including the need to reflect the seriousness of the offense, id. § 3553(a)(2)(A), to provide adequate deterrence, id. § 3553(a)(2)(B), and, because they are considered by all judges throughout the federal system, the need to "avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct," id. § 3553(a)(6).

Accordingly, while a life sentence for selling drugs alone would give pause, we would be hard put to find such a sentence beyond the bounds of reason for drug crimes of this magnitude.67Link to the text of the note But the facts of  [*131]  this case involve much more than simply facilitating the sale of narcotics. The district court found by a preponderance of the evidence that Ulbricht commissioned at least five murders in the course of protecting Silk Road's anonymity, a finding that Ulbricht does [**121]  not challenge in this appeal.68Link to the text of the note Ulbricht discussed those anticipated murders callously and casually in his journal and in his communications with the purported assassin Redandwhite. For example, in connection with the first hit, he wrote to Redandwhite that "FriendlyChemist is a liability and I wouldn't mind if he was executed." Tr. 1822. In the course of negotiating the price for the killing, DPR claimed that "[n]ot long ago, I had a clean hit done for $80k," id. at 1883, but that he had "only ever commissioned the one other hit, so I'm still learning this market," id. at 1884. He then paid $150,000 in Bitcoins for the murder, and he received what purported to be photographic documentation if its completion. Ulbricht then wrote in his journal that he "[g]ot word that the blackmailer was executed," id. at 1887, before returning quickly to other tasks associated with running the site.

In negotiating the other four killings, Ulbricht initially resisted multiple murders. He instructed Redandwhite to "just hit Andrew [usernames Tony76 and nipplesuckcanuck] and leave it at that." Id. at 1897. Redandwhite said he could do it for "150 just like last time," but that he would not be able to recover any of DPR's money if he killed only [**122]  one person because he would have to commit the murder outside of the victim's home or office where he stored his funds. Id. If Ulbricht wanted him to recover money, the self-professed assassin claimed, he would have to kill not only Tony76, but also his three associates. DPR responded that he would "defer to [Redandwhite's] better judgment and hope[d] [to] recover some assets" from the hit. Id. at 1899. He then sent $500,000 in Bitcoins, the agreed-upon price for four killings, to Redandwhite. As the district court stated in discussing Ulbricht's journal entries concerning these projected murders, his words are "the words of a man who is callous as to the consequences or the harm and suffering that [his actions] may cause others." App'x 1521.

The record was more than sufficient to support the district court's reliance on those attempted murders in sentencing Ulbricht to life in prison. The attempted murders for hire separate this case from that of an ordinary drug dealer, regardless of the quantity of drugs involved in the offense, and lend further support to the district court's finding that Ulbricht's conduct and character were exceptionally destructive. That he was able to distance himself from the [**123]  actual violence he paid for by using a computer to order the killings is not mitigating. Indeed, the cruelty that he displayed in his casual and confident negotiations for the hits is unnerving. We thus cannot say that a life sentence was outside the "range of permissible decisions" under the circumstances. Cavera, 550 F.3d at 189.

 [*132]  Ulbricht's arguments on appeal have rhetorical power because of the sheer magnitude of his sentence, but they do not provide a legal basis for vacating that sentence as substantively unreasonable. He contends that the district court ignored the letters submitted on his behalf, thus failing to consider his positive contributions to his family and society as well as his potential productivity should he be released from prison. To the contrary, however, the district court "read each and every one of [the letters] with care," some "more than once." App'x 1534. Recognizing that the letters were "beautiful" and "profoundly moving," the district court observed that they reveal Ulbricht's human complexity. Id. at 1534-35. Nothing in the record supports the claim that the district court failed to recognize the importance of the letters, incorrectly discounted Ulbricht's more favorable characteristics, [**124]  or otherwise inappropriately dismissed their role in its sentencing determination.

Similarly, Ulbricht's argument that the district court ignored his contention that Silk Road reduced the harmful effects of drug crimes must be rejected. The district court thoroughly discussed Doctor X's role at Silk Road and Ulbricht's claims that the site reduced violence, overdoses, and other harms associated with drug trafficking, and concluded that they were unpersuasive. We see no error in its analysis, and Ulbricht's arguments concerning harm reduction do not render his sentence substantively unreasonable.

Ulbricht also claims that there is an unwarranted disparity between his sentence and the approximately 17-month sentence that Peter Nash, a Silk Road administrator, received. Again, however, the district court considered the arguments concerning Nash's sentence and found them to be irrelevant to Ulbricht's crime because Nash was a low-level site administrator who pleaded guilty and cooperated with the government. Along those same lines, Ulbricht notes that Silk Road drug dealers received lower sentences than he did. For example, one such drug dealer received a ten-year sentence. The fact that [**125]  different people involved with the site received dramatically lower sentences does not mean that Ulbricht's own sentence was substantively unreasonable on the individual facts of his case.69Link to the text of the note Ulbricht was the creator and head administrator of the site. That fact alone distinguishes his case from that of any individual seller or employee who used or worked for the site. Ulbricht profited from every sale on Silk Road, and he facilitated the acts of each drug dealer and drug organization that used it. Moreover, he attempted to commission at least five murders to protect his criminal enterprise. Those facts render his case distinguishable from those who committed other crimes using Silk Road or otherwise facilitated its operation.

Ulbricht next reiterates his argument that he was more like someone running a crack house than like a drug kingpin because he created the online platform that others used to sell drugs and was not himself a drug dealer.70Link to the text of the note That argument also understates the vast extent of Silk Road's drug market, which had thousands of customers and trafficked in about $183  [*133]  million in illegal drugs. People may differ about whether "respectable" people who, acting as property owners, [**126]  money launderers, or other facilitators of crime for personal gain are less guilty than those who personally handle the narcotics. We cannot fault the district court for rejecting the argument that Ulbricht's contribution to the narcotics trade was inherently less culpable than that of the dealers who paid him to use Silk Road to complete their transactions.

Both the sentencing amici and Ulbricht further contend that the district court placed too much weight on the notion of general deterrence in meting out the life sentence. Specifically, Ulbricht fears that resorting to "general deterrence without any confining principles . . . guarantees that [the sentence] will create disparity." Appellant Br. 139. Amici also observe that academic studies counsel against placing too much emphasis on general deterrence in sentencing because severe criminal punishments do not actually decrease either supply or demand for illegal drugs. Further, according to amici, the threat of a long sentence does not deter criminal conduct more effectively than the threat of a shorter sentence. In his reply, Ulbricht identifies several lucrative dark markets that have emerged since Silk Road's demise in 2013. In [**127]  his view, the existence of multiple copycat Tor-based illegal marketplaces proves that general deterrence is illusory and that the district court placed too much weight on that factor.

Although those arguments have some support among scholars and researchers, HN54the ability of a sentence to "afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct" is a factor that district courts are required by Congress to consider in arriving at the appropriate sentence. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(B); see United States v. Tran, 519 F.3d 98, 107 (2d Cir. 2008). Congress, moreover, has not concluded that the persistence of narcotics crimes is a reason to abandon the efforts to deter them by lengthy sentences. The district court observed that "general deterrence plays a particularly important role" in Ulbricht's case because Silk Road is "without serious precedent" and generated an unusually large amount of public interest. App'x 1532-33. The court thus carefully analyzed the role that general deterrence played in Ulbricht's individual case. At the same time, it is evident from the sentencing transcript that general deterrence was "just one element in the [district court's] analysis," id. at 1533, and the district court considered many other factors before sentencing Ulbricht to life in prison. Thus, the [**128]  factor of general deterrence, "as explained by the district court, can bear the weight assigned it under the totality of circumstances in this case." Rigas, 583 F.3d at 122.

Finally, Ulbricht and amici point out that life sentences are rare in the federal system, typically reserved for egregious violent crimes, thus rendering Ulbricht's sentence substantively unreasonable.71Link to the text of the note Moreover, according to amici, life sentences are normally imposed in cases where that is the district judge's only sentencing option. Thus, they claim that Ulbricht's life sentence is substantively unreasonable in the context of the federal system, where life sentences are particularly rare for those with no criminal history  [*134]  who are convicted of drug crimes.72Link to the text of the note

We agree with Ulbricht that life sentences are extraordinary and infrequent, which is as it should be. But the rarity of life sentences does not mean that the imposition of such a sentence in this case is substantively unreasonable under our law. Each case must be considered on its own facts and in light of all of the circumstances of a particular offense as well as other relevant conduct, which, in this case, includes five attempted murders for hire. As we have [**129]  described, the district court carefully considered Ulbricht's offense, his personal characteristics, and the context for his crimes, recognizing that only exceptional cases justify such a severe sentence. Although we might not have imposed the same sentence ourselves in the first instance, on the facts of this case a life sentence was "within the range of permissible decisions" that the district court could have reached. Rigas, 583 F.3d at 122.

We do not reach our conclusion lightly.73Link to the text of the note A life sentence is the second most severe penalty that may be imposed in the federal criminal justice system. "The size of [Ulbricht's] sentence alone [therefore] counsels our careful, searching review of it." United States v. Brown, 843 F.3d 74, 85 (2d Cir. 2016) (Sack., J., concurring). Courts have the power to condemn a young man to die in prison, and judges must exercise that power only in a small number of cases after the deepest thought and reflection. Of course, any "sentencing proceeding is a solemn occasion at which the judge has the weighty duty of determining the fate of another human being." United States v. Alcantara, 396 F.3d 189, 199 (2d Cir. 2005). We must be especially sensitive to that duty where the most severe sentences are in question. The district court gave Ulbricht's sentence the thorough consideration that it required, [**130]  reviewing the voluminous sentencing submissions, analyzing the factors required by law, and carefully weighing Ulbricht's mitigating arguments. The extraordinarily detailed sentencing transcript shows that the district court appreciated its important responsibility in considering a sentence of such magnitude and carried out that responsibility with care and prudence. Under the law, we cannot say that its decision was substantively unreasonable.



 [*135]  CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the judgment of the district court in all respects.

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The seven crimes of conviction were: (1) distribution and aiding and abetting distribution of narcotics, 21 U.S.C. § 812, § 841(a)(1), § 841(b)(1)(A) and 18 U.S.C. § 2; (2) using the Internet to distribute narcotics, 21 U.S.C. § 812, § 841(h) and § 841(b)(1)(A); (3) conspiracy to distribute narcotics, 21 U.S.C. § 846; (4) engaging in a continuing criminal enterprise, 21 U.S.C. § 848(a); (5) conspiring to obtain unauthorized access to a computer for purposes of commercial advantage and private financial gain and in furtherance of other criminal and tortious acts, 18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2) and § 1030(b); (6) conspiring to traffic in fraudulent identification documents, 18 U.S.C. § 1028(f); and (7) conspiring to launder money, 18 U.S.C. § 1956(h).

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Tor is short for the "The Onion Router." The Tor Network is "a special network on the Internet designed to make it practically impossible to physically locate the computers hosting or accessing websites on the network." App'x 53. The Tor Network can be accessed via the Tor browser using software that anyone may obtain for free on the Internet.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Bitcoins allow vendors and customers to maintain their anonymity in the same way that cash does, by transferring Bitcoins between anonymous Bitcoin accounts, which do not contain any identifying information about the user of each account. The currency is "traceable" in that the transaction history of each individual Bitcoin is logged in what is called the blockchain. The blockchain prevents a person from spending the same Bitcoin twice, allowing Bitcoin to operate similarly to a traditional form of currency. Bitcoin is also a completely decentralized currency, operating free of nation states or central banks; anyone who downloads the Bitcoin software becomes part of the Bitcoin network. The blockchain is stored on that network, and the blockchain automatically "self-updates" when a Bitcoin transaction takes place. Tr. 160.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
The government first learned of Silk Road and began investigating it in 2011 after international packages containing drugs were intercepted at Chicago's O'Hare airport.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
S.A. refers to the joint sealed appendix in this case. Portions of the sealed appendix quoted in this opinion are to that extent unsealed.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Both Force and Bridges pleaded guilty to money laundering and obstruction of justice; Force also pleaded guilty to extortion. Force was sentenced to 78 months in prison, and Bridges received a 71-month sentence.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
According to the criminal complaint against Ulbricht, a Bitcoin wallet is a storage method for Bitcoins. The wallet is associated with a Bitcoin address, which is "analogous to the account number for a bank account, while the 'wallet' is analogous to a bank safe where the money in the account is physically stored." App'x 59. Users can transact in Bitcoin by transferring Bitcoins from one "Bitcoin address to the Bitcoin address of another user, over the Internet." Id. Ulbricht does not dispute that definition.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
As described below, the government disclosed shortly before trial that Force was under investigation for Silk Road corruption, but said nothing about Bridges. Specifically, the pretrial disclosure noted that Force was under investigation for using the Flush account to steal $350,000, but the criminal complaint against the agents alleges that Bridges committed that particular theft. According to the government, both Force and Bridges had access to the Flush account, which might explain their initial suspicion that Force stole the funds.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
Mt. Gox was a prominent Bitcoin exchanger owned by Mark Karpeles.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
DeathFromAbove also referred to the $250,000 payment he demanded as "punitive damages." App'x 875. In the government's view, the "punitive damages" remark referenced the murder of a Silk Road administrator that Ulbricht ordered and paid for (but that was never carried out). That and other killings that DPR commissioned will be described in more detail below.

11Link to the location of the note in the document
The timing of this change corresponds to a January 15, 2012 Tor chat between a user named "vj" and Ulbricht, in which vj advised Ulbricht to change his username from Admin to Dread Pirate Roberts.

12Link to the location of the note in the document
See William Goldman, The Princess Bride: S. Morgenstern's Classic Tale of True Love and High Adventure (1973); The Princess Bride (20th Century Fox 1987).

13Link to the location of the note in the document
PGP stands for "Pretty Good Privacy."

14Link to the location of the note in the document
Tor Chat is a program that allows "communication between people on the Tor network." Tr. 889.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht was not charged in this case with crimes based on ordering these killings, although evidence relating to the murders was introduced at trial as actions taken in furtherance of the charged conspiracies and criminal enterprise. The killings were referenced again in connection with Ulbricht's sentencing. He faces open attempted murder-for-hire charges in the District of Maryland, however. United States v. Ulbricht, No. 13-0222-CCB (D. Md.). That indictment charges Ulbricht with the attempted murder of Curtis Green (Flush). According to the criminal complaint against the corrupt officers, after Bridges, using Flush's account, stole $350,000 in Bitcoin in January 2013, DPR recruited Nob (Force) to kill Flush as punishment for the theft. DPR paid Nob $80,000 to carry out the murder, which Force faked to make Ulbricht believe that the task was complete. Presumably because the government removed from its trial evidence anything that the corrupted agent Force may have touched, it did not present evidence of the Flush murder-for-hire agreement, nor did it rely on that murder at sentencing.

16Link to the location of the note in the document
There are two versions of the trial transcript for January 22, 2015 on the district court docket. The page citations here refer to the version of the transcript marked "corrected," which is listed on the district court docket as Document No. 208 (14-cr-68).

17Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht noticed his intent to call Antonopoulos on January 26 and Bellovin on January 30, 2015.

18Link to the location of the note in the document
The government also argued generally that some of the topics identified in the disclosures were not relevant to Ulbricht's case or did not require expert testimony.

19Link to the location of the note in the document
The PSR did not refer to the additional murder of "Flush" that DPR allegedly paid Force, under his undercover identity Nob, to commit. See supra note 15.

20Link to the location of the note in the document
As the government pointed out in its sentencing submission, fake vendor reviews were commonplace, and vendors sometimes coerced customers into giving them perfect ratings.

21Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht referenced a study by Tim Bingham, who researched Silk Road users between September 2012 and August 2013. Bingham interviewed Silk Road customers and concluded that the site operated as a "novel technological drug subculture, potentially minimiz[ing] drug-related stigma by reinforcing a[] sense of community." App'x 905. Thus, Bingham concluded, and Ulbricht argued, that Silk Road encouraged more "responsible forms of recreational drug use." Id. at 906.

22Link to the location of the note in the document
At sentencing, the district court vacated Ulbricht's convictions on Counts One and Three because they were lesser included offenses of Counts Two and Four respectively. Ulbricht was therefore sentenced on Counts Two, Four, Five, Six, and Seven. The district court based its Guidelines calculation only on those counts.

23Link to the location of the note in the document
The calculated offense level was actually 50, which is higher than the maximum offense level of 43 on the Guidelines sentencing table. The Guidelines provide that "[a]n offense level of more than 43 is to be treated as an offense level of 43." U.S.S.G. ch. 5 pt. A, cmt. n.2.

24Link to the location of the note in the document
Because of the grouping rules, U.S.S.G. ch. 3 pt. D, the lower offense levels of the computer hacking and fraudulent identification charges did not contribute to Ulbricht's offense level.

25Link to the location of the note in the document
The district court did not specifically address one of the six deaths. That decedent was a frequent Silk Road customer who was found dead in his home with a used syringe and other drug paraphernalia. The record does not indicate why the district court did not discuss that case, and neither party makes any argument based on that omission.

26Link to the location of the note in the document
Data are transmitted on the Internet via discrete packets, rather than in a continuous stream. TCP is a "communications protocol used to process such data packets associated with popular Internet applications," such as browser and e-mail applications. S.A. 97. Like IP address data, the TCP data that the orders permitted the government to acquire do not include the contents of communications, and Ulbricht has not expressed any independent concern over the government's collection of TCP connection data.

27Link to the location of the note in the document
Some of the pen/trap orders phrased the scope of the order slightly differently. For example, one order authorized installing "a trap and trace device to identify the source [IP] address of any Internet communications directed to, and a pen register to determine the destination IP addresses of any Internet communications originating from," the relevant devices. S.A. 67. In other words, not every order sought TCP connection data as well as IP address information. Neither party has suggested that the differences among the pen/trap orders are material to any issue presented by this appeal.

28Link to the location of the note in the document
In the district court, Ulbricht made the same arguments concerning his Fourth Amendment privacy interest in the information captured by the pen registers and trap and trace devices. The district court ruled generally that the "type of information sought [in the orders] was entirely appropriate for that type of order." App'x 208. The court declined to address Ulbricht's "novel Fourth Amendment arguments" regarding the pen/trap devices because he had "not established the requisite privacy interest . . . to" demonstrate his standing to challenge the orders. Id. The government has agreed that Ulbricht has standing to pursue his Fourth Amendment arguments on appeal.

29Link to the location of the note in the document
The issue presented in this case is narrowly confined to orders that are limited to the capture of IP addresses, TCP connection data, and similar routing information. Our holding therefore does not address other, more invasive surveillance techniques that capture more information (such as content), which may require a warrant issued on probable cause or an order pursuant to Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, codified as amended at 18 U.S.C. §§ 2510-22. See generally In the Matter of a Warrant for All Content & Other Info. Associated with the Email Account xxxxxxx@gmail.com Maintained at Premises Controlled by Google, Inc., 33 F. Supp. 3d 386, 393-96 (S.D.N.Y. 2014), as amended (Aug. 7, 2014) (describing the available caselaw concerning search warrants of email accounts). Similarly, to the extent that some of the out-of-circuit cases cited in the text also address the Fourth Amendment status of other types of evidence, such as historical cell-site location information, we express no views on such issues, which are not presented in this case.

30Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht's alternative argument, that the pen/trap orders violated the Pen/Trap Act and the Stored Communications Act ("SCA") because they sought prospective data, is without merit. Ulbricht claims that the orders were obtained both through the Pen/Trap Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3121-27, and the SCA, 18 U.S.C. § 2703(d). To the contrary, each pen/trap order (and the underlying requests for such orders) relied exclusively on the Pen/Trap Act, not the SCA. The fact that one of the government's goals was to monitor IP address traffic to match Ulbricht's Internet activity with DPR's does not undermine the validity of the orders. The orders themselves did not allow the government to track the location of the router and other equipment to which the trap and trace device was attached. Thus, they were not "geo-locating" devices, as Ulbricht suggests, any more than subpoenas for hotel registers, parking tickets, and credit card receipts, or any other methods by which the government obtains information that can be used to identify a suspect's location at particular points in time.

31Link to the location of the note in the document
HN13 In addition to preventing general searches, the particularity requirement serves two other purposes not relevant to this appeal: "preventing the seizure of objects upon the mistaken assumption that they fall within the magistrate's authorization, and preventing the issuance of warrants without a substantial factual basis." United States v. Young, 745 F.2d 733, 759 (2d Cir. 1984).

32Link to the location of the note in the document
Because the warrant incorporated the affidavit by reference, we refer to the documents together as the Laptop Warrant for the sake of simplicity.

33Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht does not challenge the existence of probable cause to believe both that he committed these offenses and that the laptop would contain evidence of them.

34Link to the location of the note in the document
The district court ruled that Ulbricht did not have standing to raise his Fourth Amendment challenges because he did not establish that he had a personal expectation of privacy in the laptop or his Facebook and Google accounts. We express no view on that issue, since the district court also reached the merits of the motion to suppress and the government has agreed that Ulbricht has standing to challenge the warrants and accompanying searches.

35Link to the location of the note in the document
It is worth noting that Ulbricht does not challenge the validity of the search warrant covering his home, although that warrant is quite similar to the Laptop Warrant and appears to be just as broad. Specifically, the home search warrant allows the government to search for and seize evidence concerning Ulbricht's travel or patterns of movement and any of his communications or writings.

36Link to the location of the note in the document
We note that Ulbricht and amicus NACDL somewhat exaggerate the novelty of computer searches in this regard. A traditional physical search for paper "drug records" or "tax records" may entail a similar examination of all sorts of files and papers to determine whether such records are hidden in files with innocuous or misleading names or written in coded terms to mask their content. For obvious reasons, search warrants authorizing the seizure of such evidence have not traditionally specified that agents may look only at file folders labeled "drug records" or may seize only papers containing the word "cocaine"—the equivalent of the ex ante "search terms" demanded by Ulbricht.

37Link to the location of the note in the document
Evidence revealing a suspect's past movements is often highly relevant to a criminal investigation. Such evidence might be used to establish—or rule out—the suspect's presence at a crime scene or other pertinent location at a particular time. It may also disclose other, unrelated information about the suspect's non-criminal associations, interests, and behavior, and may be drawn from a wide variety of sources. Government efforts to develop such information, including by search warrants authorizing its seizure, are not inherently questionable under the Fourth Amendment. Using piecemeal or laborious investigative techniques, it might take law enforcement officers a great deal of time and effort to compile a comprehensive record of a suspect's travel or other movements. The fact that extensive travel records are stored on a digital device and may be accessed readily via a keystroke or quick search does not immunize those records from seizure. Indeed, the seizure of a paper journal or calendar in a conventional search will often allow officers to map out a defendant's travel history with similar ease.

38Link to the location of the note in the document
The government also contends that, even if the warrants were invalid, the good faith exception prevents the application of the exclusionary rule. In general, HN20 the "exclusion of evidence is inappropriate when the government acts in objectively reasonable reliance on a search warrant, even when the warrant is subsequently invalidated." Ganias, 824 F.3d at 221 (internal quotation marks omitted). Because we conclude that all three of the warrants were valid, we need not address the government's alternative argument.

39Link to the location of the note in the document
The government required such an order because HN21 grand jury proceedings are secret and a government attorney "must not disclose a matter occurring before the grand jury," Rule 6(e)(2)(B)(vi), Fed. R. Crim. P., without a court order, Rule 6(e)(3)(E), subject to limited exceptions not relevant here.

40Link to the location of the note in the document
Portions of the district court opinion were redacted because they referenced the defendant's ex parte submissions explaining how he would use information related to the Force investigation at trial. This Court has reviewed an unredacted version of the district court opinion in connection with this appeal, but not the ex parte letters that the opinion references.

41Link to the location of the note in the document
As noted above, see note 5, we have carefully considered to what extent it is appropriate to refer to portions of the record that remain under seal. We have been especially careful in describing the portions of the district court's opinion that remain redacted and therefore are still not available to the government or to the public. We appreciate that charges against Ulbricht remain pending in Maryland and that the redacted information describes what would have been his trial strategy had he been able to reference Force's corruption. We have thus described the defense's redacted arguments at a fairly high level of generality. We are confident that any experienced prosecutor could anticipate those arguments, and that in any event the information is largely stated or implied in Ulbricht's own publicly filed briefs on appeal. Particularly given that our description relates to how the Force information might have been used at a trial that is now completed, and that we now hold that Ulbricht is not entitled to a new trial, we conclude that the public's need to understand and evaluate Ulbricht's arguments that he was unfairly prejudiced by the district court's rulings, as well as our reasons for rejecting those arguments, outweighs any minimal interest that Ulbricht might have in withholding his contentions from the government.

42Link to the location of the note in the document
Even on appeal, moreover, after the disclosure of additional information in the prosecutions of Bridges and Force, Ulbricht does not provide any concrete explanation of how the techniques used by the corrupt agents to steal money from Silk Road could have been used, by them or by others, to plant the massive amounts of incriminating information found on Ulbricht's laptop and in his house.

43Link to the location of the note in the document
For example, the government declined to present evidence of DPR's attempt to commission an additional murder because that conduct involved Force acting as Nob.

44Link to the location of the note in the document
Moreover, the district court specifically ruled that it would entertain Ulbricht's applications to rely on specific parts of the letter at trial if doing so would be necessary for effective cross-examination. Thus, Ulbricht was given the opportunity to show particularized need in the context of specific trial evidence. Ulbricht has not identified any point in the trial where he attempted to show that Force's behavior had become relevant to challenging the credibility of particular aspects of the prosecution's case.

45Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht filed his Rule 33 motion on March 6, 2015. The criminal complaint against Force and Bridges was unsealed on March 30, which is the first time that Ulbricht learned that Bridges was corrupt and was involved in the case.

46Link to the location of the note in the document
In a footnote, Ulbricht claims that failing to disclose the full extent of the agents' corruption deprived him of an opportunity to "attack[] the investigation as shoddy." Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U.S. 419, 442 n.13, 115 S. Ct. 1555, 131 L. Ed. 2d 490 (1995). Now that he has all of the relevant information, he still does not explain how he might have demonstrated deficiencies in the government's investigation of his or one of the other initial suspects' conduct that would undermine our confidence in the verdict.

47Link to the location of the note in the document
As the government explains, and Ulbricht does not dispute, JABS is a database maintained by the United States Marshals Service that catalogues information regarding alleged offenders who have been arrested and booked by federal, state, or local law enforcement agencies.

48Link to the location of the note in the document
It is undisputed that the government requested such disclosure on December 29, 2014, two weeks before trial began.

49Link to the location of the note in the document
In particular, Ulbricht's disclosures did not discuss, and he has not described on appeal, how one expert's proposed testimony on "[g]eneral principles of internet security and vulnerabilities" would have linked to the defense claim that the damning documentary evidence of Ulbricht's guilt found on his laptop was or could have been fabricated or planted. The jury was aware from other evidence, and indeed it is within ordinary lay experience, that various forms of hacking are possible. What was lacking, what the defense expert disclosures did not purport to address, and what Ulbricht still has not provided on appeal, is any explanation, let alone a credible explanation, of how the breadth and variety of information, from the laptop and other sources, could have been planted.

50Link to the location of the note in the document
We have explained that HN36 a Daubert reliability assessment requires a district court to consider the "extent to which [the expert's theory] has been subjected to peer review and publication," whether the technique is "subject to standards controlling the technique's operation," the "known or potential rate of error," and the "degree of acceptance within the relevant scientific community." United States v. Romano, 794 F.3d 317, 330 (2d Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted). That inquiry is a "flexible one," however, and Daubert is not a "definitive checklist or test" for the reliability of expert testimony. Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, "[w]hether Daubert's specific factors are, or are not, reasonable measures of reliability in a particular case is a matter that the law grants the trial judge broad latitude to determine." Id. at 331 (internal quotation marks omitted).

51Link to the location of the note in the document
"The terms hot wallet and cold wallet derive from the more general terms hot storage, meaning online storage, and cold storage, meaning offline storage. A hot wallet is a Bitcoin wallet for which the private keys are stored on a network-connected machine (i.e.[,] in hot storage). By contrast, for a cold wallet the private keys are stored offline." Steven Goldfeder et al., Securing Bitcoin Wallets via a New DSA/ECDSA Threshold Signature Scheme, Princeton University 10, available at http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~stevenag/threshold_sigs.pdf .

52Link to the location of the note in the document
No evidence about the source of those Bitcoins was in fact presented by Ulbricht, and neither the expert disclosures presented to the district court nor Ulbricht's arguments on appeal suggest that either Bellovin or Antonopoulos would have provided an analysis or explanation of Ulbricht's Bitcoin transactions that would have revealed a non-Silk Road source for Ulbricht's Bitcoins.

53Link to the location of the note in the document
BitTorrent is a peer-to-peer file sharing service that is used to transfer large files without disrupting Internet servers. It has both legitimate and illicit purposes. See Next Phase Distribution, Inc. v. John Does 1-27, 284 F.R.D. 165, 167 (S.D.N.Y. 2012).

54Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht also contends on appeal that the government's objection to the testimony, which occurred at a later sidebar, was untimely. He cites no law in support of that argument. In general, HN41 an "objection should be made after the question has been asked but before an answer has been given." Hutchinson v. Groskin, 927 F.2d 722, 725 (2d Cir. 1991). That "rule is not inflexible," id., however, and we do not "necessarily find [a]n objection affirmatively waived because it might have been interposed a few questions earlier," United States v. Pujana-Mena, 949 F.2d 24, 33 (2d Cir. 1991). Thus, although a contemporaneous objection is preferable, the district court was within its discretion to sustain the later objection and strike the testimony.

55Link to the location of the note in the document
PHP is a common computer programming language that is used primarily in website development.

56Link to the location of the note in the document
A kernel is an operating system's core, and it "is an essential part of the Linux operating system." Tr. 1070.

57Link to the location of the note in the document
The government did not concede that the statement was Brady information, but disclosed it "in an abundance of caution." App'x 398.

58Link to the location of the note in the document
What Ulbricht sought to introduce was the government's letter paraphrasing a statement made by Jones during an interview, not a verbatim transcript of what Jones had said. We refer to it as the "Jones statement" for the sake of simplicity.

59Link to the location of the note in the document
We note that the Jones statement is double hearsay, in that the defense sought to admit the government's subsequent characterization of Jones's interview, and both the government's letter and Jones's statement to the agents were out of court statements offered for their truth. HN43 When confronted with "hearsay within hearsay, or double hearsay," courts must determine that "each part of the combined statement[]" is independently admissible. United States v. Williams, 927 F.2d 95, 100 (2d Cir. 1991). Because we conclude that no hearsay exception applied to the Jones statement at all, we need not address the double hearsay issue.

60Link to the location of the note in the document
The amici who join Ulbricht's challenge to his life sentence include: the Drug Policy Alliance, Law Enforcement Against Prohibition, JustLeadershipUSA, and retired District Judge Nancy Gertner.

61Link to the location of the note in the document
In the sixth case, Dr. Taff concluded that the cause of death was ingesting multiple drugs coupled with a pre-existing heart condition. The original forensic reports concerning that death did not factor in the presence of drugs other than synthetic marijuana (obtained via Silk Road) and did not include the heart condition as a contributing cause.

62Link to the location of the note in the document
Sentencing amici make a similar argument, claiming that a complex array of causes are responsible for drug-related deaths, including societal failures. Assuming that is correct, the increased availability of drugs is certainly one of the causes of overdose and other drug-related accidental deaths. Thus, the district court did not err in concluding that Silk Road, which was by all accounts a market-expanding drug enterprise, contributed to the general social costs of drug trafficking. Those harms are numerous and include the risk of death.

63Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht does not argue that the evidence related to the accidental overdose deaths should have been excluded due to its emotional nature; his argument is based solely on the claim that the evidence was irrelevant because the deaths were not sufficiently linked to Silk Road.

64Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht does not challenge the propriety of those statements apart from his general argument that it was procedurally unreasonable to consider the six deaths as relevant to his sentence.

65Link to the location of the note in the document
In a footnote in his reply brief, Ulbricht raises for the first time an additional argument: that the district court improperly gave him a life sentence because of the political and philosophical beliefs that led him to start Silk Road in the first instance. Ulbricht argues that reliance on political beliefs at sentencing is prohibited by the Guidelines, U.S.S.G. § 5H1.10, and the First Amendment. The district court reflected on Ulbricht's philosophy, however, only in the course of discussing his character and his reasons for committing the offense. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(1). That discussion was relevant to sentencing. Ulbricht, as the district court concluded, "viewed Silk Road both as above the law and the laws didn't apply." App'x 1515. He appeared to believe that his personal views about the propriety of the drug laws and the paramount role of individual liberty entitled him to violate democratically-enacted criminal prohibitions. For example, some of his Silk Road posts "discuss the laws as the oppressor" and proclaim that "each transaction is a victory over the oppressor." Id. at 1516. That Ulbricht believes that drug use should be legalized is not relevant to sentencing; that he believes he is entitled to break the laws that prohibit certain substances is relevant to his likelihood of recidivism, a mandated sentencing consideration. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(C). The district court therefore did not sentence Ulbricht based on any prohibited characteristic, nor did the court place more weight on that factor than the facts warranted. Cf. United States v. Jenkins, 854 F.3d. 181, 2017 WL 1371399 (2d Cir. 2017) (vacating a sentence as substantively unreasonable where the district court relied exclusively on the defendant's "disdain for the law" in "dramatically increasing" a defendant's sentence for child pornography offenses). Ulbricht's disrespect for the law was simply one factor that the district court considered in imposing sentence, along with many others, and was not accorded undue weight in determining the sentence.

66Link to the location of the note in the document
As explained, Silk Road also trafficked in illegal goods such as counterfeit identification documents and computer hacking tools and services. When the government shut down Silk Road, there were 156 listings for forged identity documents on the site. The specific computer hacking tools available included software for compromising usernames and passwords of electronic accounts, including email and Facebook; Remote Access Tools ("RATs") that allow hackers to obtain remote access to a victim's computer, including turning on and using the computer's webcam; keyloggers, which allow a user to monitor keystrokes inputted by a victim to discern their passwords and other sensitive information; and Distributed Denial of Service ("DDoS") tools, which allow hackers to disable websites by flooding networks with malicious Internet traffic. Silk Road also offered money laundering services through vendors who sold U.S. currency and anonymous debit cards. Because the adjusted offense levels for those groups of offenses were substantially lower than the offense level for the drug group, they did not contribute to Ulbricht's overall offense level. In assessing the substantive reasonableness of the sentence imposed, however, it is well to remember that the sentence encompassed Ulbricht's role not only in the distribution of controlled substances, but in a wide variety of other criminal offenses as well.

67Link to the location of the note in the document
Note that such a sentence is mandatory under federal law for selling just five kilograms of cocaine after two prior convictions for any felony narcotics offense, see 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(A), and the Supreme Court has upheld against constitutional challenge a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment for selling 650 grams of cocaine, Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 111 S. Ct. 2680, 115 L. Ed. 2d 836 (1991).

68Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht does not mention his orders for the commission of those murders until his reply brief. Even there, he does not argue that the district court erred in concluding that he deliberately commissioned those murders; rather, he claims instead only that the murders did not support a life sentence because they did not actually take place. But in evaluating Ulbricht's character and dangerousness, the most relevant points are that he wanted the murders to be committed, he paid for them, and he believed that they had been carried out. The fact that his hired assassin may have defrauded him does not reflect positively on Ulbricht's character. Commissioning the murders significantly justified the life sentence.

69Link to the location of the note in the document
In his reply, Ulbricht references other instances in which people involved with Silk Road (and its apparent reincarnation, Silk Road 2.0) received significantly lower sentences. Ulbricht does not provide sufficient detail about those individuals' conduct, however, to permit meaningful comparisons with his case.

70Link to the location of the note in the document
Ulbricht did sell drugs on Silk Road for at least some brief period of time, when he grew and sold hallucinogenic mushrooms to drum up interest in the site.

71Link to the location of the note in the document
Amici also claim that Ulbricht's life sentence violates the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment. That argument is plainly incorrect in light of binding Supreme Court precedent to the contrary. See Harmelin, 501 U.S. 957, 111 S. Ct. 2680, 115 L. Ed. 2d 836.

72Link to the location of the note in the document
In his reply, Ulbricht raises a distinct but related argument for the first time. He argues that "concurrences from Supreme Court opinions and dissents from denials of certiorari suggest[] that judicial factfinding violates a defendant's constitutional right to a jury trial where the factfinding renders reasonable an otherwise substantively unreasonable sentence." Reply Br. 60. For that proposition, he cites United States v. Hebert, 813 F.3d 551, 563 (5th Cir. 2015), cert. denied, 137 S. Ct. 37, 196 L. Ed. 2d 26 (2016), Jones v. United States, 135 S. Ct. 8, 190 L. Ed. 2d 279 (2014) (Scalia, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari), and United States v. White, 551 F.3d 381, 386 (6th Cir. 2008) (Merritt, J., dissenting). His argument, however, has no support in existing law.

73Link to the location of the note in the document
The life sentence is particularly severe because, as in all federal cases, Ulbricht will never be eligible for parole. Unlike state sentences in jurisdictions permitting a sentence of, for example, "25 years to life," there is no automatic reconsideration of this sentence, or of whether an offender has reformed, after any lengthy period of incarceration. We note that, particularly in the case of a young offender, the prisoner will all but certainly change (for better or worse) after many years of incarceration. In a system without parole, however, a sentencing court is forced to exercise its best judgment to predict whether a sentence of life imprisonment or one of 25, 30, or 50 years is required to serve the purposes of sentencing, without the option of deferring that judgment to a point at which the effects of incarceration, and the passage of time, will be more apparent. ORDER
After a 4-week trial, a jury convicted Stephen Stockman of 23 counts of mail fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy to make conduit contributions and false statements to the Federal Election Commission, making false statements to the Federal Election Commission, making excessive [*2]  campaign contributions, money laundering, and filing a false tax return. (Docket Entry No. 211). After the verdict, the court ordered Stockman detained pending sentencing, based on the presumption of detention following conviction, and the evidence at trial that showed Stockman had extensive international contacts, had sent Jason Posey to Egypt for two years to frustrate the criminal investigation, had received money from an unknown source to fund his defense, and had a significantly greater incentive to flee after the guilty verdict than before trial.

Stockman moved for release pending sentencing and the government responded. (Docket Entries No. 255, 259). Stockman asserts several grounds. First, he argues that he will appear for his sentencing, pointing out his consistent court appearances and compliance with conditions of release before trial while he was on an unsecured bond. Second, he includes several letters from family and friends, emphasizing his strong ties to the United States, the Houston area, and to his family and community. Finally, he alleges that he is not receiving adequate medical treatment for his medical conditions. Instead of detention, Stockman proposes the following [*3]  conditions: "(1) no contact with co-Defendants; (2) electronic GPS monitoring; (3) pretrial service supervision with reporting; (4) having a third-party custodian on a bond; and (5) any other conditions that the Court sees fit." (Docket Entry No. 255 at 9).

In response, the government argues vigorously that Stockman is a flight risk. First, the steep potential maximum sentence he faces—approximately 283 years—creates a strong incentive to flee, especially considering that Stockman is 61 years old. Second, the complex nature of the crimes, involving multiple bank accounts, sham nonprofit entities, disposable cell phones, and cryptocurrency transactions, shows that Stockman has the ability to use similar conduct to flee pending sentencing. Third, Stockman's extensive international contacts and travel history counsel against release. The government points to: (1) trial testimony about Stockman's contacts with government officials in Egypt, the Republic of the Congo, and South Sudan; (2) the testimony of one of Stockman's witnesses, who lives in the Republic of the Congo, that she considered Stockman to be "family" and that Stockman was a "very important person" in the Republic of the Congo; [*4]  and (3) Stockman's extensive history of international travel, including 19 international flights in 2015 and 18 international flights in 2016. Fourth, Stockman's contention that he lacks financial resources is undermined by his scheme to fraudulently obtain and launder $1.2 million, as well as his demonstrated ability to raise significant funds from other sources, including funding for attorneys from an anonymous third-party benefactor. (Docket Entry No. 81). Finally, the government argues that Stockman has used international means to avoid prosecution in the past, citing the trial testimony showing that Stockman sent Posey to Egypt and sent funds to him there—first through Ben Wetmore and later through Bitcoin—to keep him far away from the ongoing criminal investigation.

A court "shall order that a person who has been found guilty of an offense and who is awaiting imposition or execution of sentence . . . be detained, unless the judicial officer finds by clear and convincing evidence that the person is not likely to flee or pose a danger to the safety of any other person or the community if released . . . ." 18 U.S.C. § 3143(a). "The burden of establishing that the defendant will not flee or pose a danger [*5]  to any other person or to the community rests with the defendant." FED. R. CRIM. P. 46(c). The decision to detain a defendant after conviction is "common . . . because of the presumption in favor of detention that attaches to a convicted defendant." United States v. Morrison, 833 F.3d 491, 506 (5th Cir. 2016).

Stockman has not met his burden to show by clear and convincing evidence that he is not a flight risk. While Stockman complied with the appearance conditions of his pretrial conduct, the incentives and the legal burden of proof changed when he was convicted. See United States v. Adenuga, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12019, 2014 WL 349568, at *5 (N.D. Tex. Jan. 31, 2014) ("[S]omething has changed since trial; Defendant is no longer presumed innocent but is guilty of the counts of conviction. His [or her] legal status has changed, increasing his [or her] incentive to flee." (quoting United States v. Jinwright, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85677, 2010 WL 2926084 (W.D.N.C. July 23, 2010))). Before trial, there was a possibility that Stockman would be acquitted; now, he faces a potentially lengthy prison sentence, providing a stronger incentive to flee. Additionally, as the government accurately points out, the nature of Stockman's offenses, his extensive international contacts and history of international travel, and the trial testimony establishing that Stockman sent Posey to Egypt to avoid detection by law enforcement weigh strongly against release pending sentencing. Although [*6]  the letters in support of Stockman's motion show ties to his family, community, and the United States, he has not shown, by clear and convincing evidence, that he is not a flight risk.

The motion for release pending sentencing, (Docket Entry No. 255), is denied. The court will instruct the U.S. Marshals Service to work with the personnel at the Joe Corley Detention Facility to monitor Stockman's timely receipt of the medical attention and medication he needs.

SIGNED on May 30, 2018, at Houston, Texas.

/s/ Lee H. Rosenthal

Lee H. Rosenthal

Chief United States District Judge

. ORDER
Pending before the Court is Defendant Ryan Patrick Michell's Motion to Suppress (Doc. 31). The Court denies the motion.



BACKGROUND
Federal law enforcement attested to the following facts in an application for a search warrant of Defendant Ryan Patrick Michell's property. On October 24, 2017, Defendant Michell contacted an undercover law enforcement officer via an online, hidden-service market in an attempt to purchase potassium cyanide and dimethyl mercury. Over the next few weeks, Defendant Michell and the officer discussed various aspects of the chemicals, such as price, quantity and purity. Mr. Michell stated that he planned to use the chemicals for gold extraction, and he eventually purchased one hundred grams of potassium cyanide, which he purchased using Bitcoin. Mr. Michell had the potassium cyanide delivered to his home, addressing the package to "K.F.", which are the initials [*2]  of the property's previous tenant.

The warrant application also requested a search for firearms and ammunition. In 1996, Arizona law enforcement arrested Mr. Michell for aggravated assault. Although Mr. Michelle was a minor at the time, his case was transferred to adult court, and Mr. Michell pled guilty and received a two-year prison sentence. In April 2015, Mr. Michell posted two pictures on his Facebook account in which he was shooting a rifle. In May 2016, Mr. Michell posted another picture of a rifle and included this caption, "Went out to practice with my AR-10 today! . . . It is a great addition to our collection." (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 30).

On December 1, 2017, Magistrate Judge Bridget Bade authorized a warrant for law enforcement to search Defendant Ryan Patrick Michell's one-story home for items associated with chemical weapons and firearms and ammunition.



DISCUSSION

I. Legal Standard
The Fourth Amendment requires that search warrants be based "upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularity describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized." The duty of a reviewing court is simply to ensure that the issuing judge had a "substantial basis" for [*3]  concluding that probable cause existed under the totality of the circumstances. Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 214, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983). The task of the issuing judge is "to make a practical, common-sense decision whether . . . there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place." Id. When interpreting seemingly innocent conduct, the court issuing the warrant is entitled to rely on the training and experience of police officers. United States v. Gil, 58 F.3d 1414, 1418 (9th Cir. 1995); United States v. Arrellano—Rios, 799 F.2d 520, 523 (9th Cir. 1986) ("The experience of a trained law enforcement agent is entitled to consideration in determining whether there was probable cause."). The issuing judge considers "the totality of the circumstances" in its decision. United States v. Ocampo, 937 F.2d 485, 490 (9th Cir. 1991). In borderline cases, preference will be accorded to warrants and to the decision of the judge issuing it. United States v. Krupa, 658 F.3d 1174, 1179 (9th Cir. 2011).



II. Analysis

A. Chemical Weapons
The warrant application listed 18 U.S.C. § 229(a) in Attachment B of the warrant as a basis for its search. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1 at 6). This section prohibits the use of chemical weapons and makes it unlawful "to develop, produce, otherwise acquire, transfer directly or indirectly, receive, stockpile, retain, own, possess, or use, or threaten to use, any chemical weapon . . . ." The statute defines "toxic [*4]  chemical" as "any chemical which through its chemical action on life processes can cause death, temporary incapacitation or permanent harm to humans or animals." Id. at § 229F(8)(A). The statute allows for ownership of such chemicals for "[p]urposes not prohibited by this chapter," which encompasses "[a]ny peaceful purpose related to an industrial, agricultural, research, medical, or pharmaceutical activity or other activity." Id. at § 229F(7)(A); see also Bond v. U.S., 134 S. Ct. 2077, 2092, 189 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2014) (citing to a prosecution of potassium cyanide possession as an example of a prosecution under 18 U.S.C. § 229 of an extremely dangerous substance). The warrant application included a section on 18 U.S.C. § 229 where it described the prohibited use of chemical weapons, the definition of a toxic chemical, and the definition of prohibited use of these chemicals. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 34-37). The warrant application also described the potential malicious use of potassium cyanide and dimethyl mercury. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 24-25). Mr. Michell argues that because the mere purchase and possession of potassium cyanide is not a crime, the government lacked probable cause that Mr. Michell would use the potassium cyanide as a chemical weapon.

A series of legal acts may provide the basis for [*5]  probable cause of illegal acts. As the Ninth Circuit has described, innocent acts, which "if reviewed separately, might be consistent with innocence," may establish probably cause if "considered as a totality, would likely create a fair probability of suspicion in any person of average acumen and experience." United States v. Ocampo, 937 F.2d 485, 490 (9th Cir. 1991) (quoting United States v. Hoyos, 892 F.2d 1387, 1393 (9th Cir. 1989)).

In the warrant application, the FBI Special Agent testified that Mr. Michell participated in the following activities. Mr. Michell used a hidden service website to solicit the purchase of potassium cyanide and dimethyl mercury, even though these chemicals are available at much cheaper prices in public forums. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 4-6, 25). Mr. Michell used the essentially non-traceable Bitcoin cryptocurrency to purchase the chemicals. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 17). Mr. Michell used the initials of a former tenant of his property for shipping the potassium cyanide. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 17-18). Mr. Michell ensured that his communication with the seller was secured and encrypted. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 15). Although Mr. Michell stated that he planned to use the chemicals for gold extraction, he did not own or participate in a laboratory business or metal extraction [*6]  business. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 11, 21). The undercover agent did not ship dimethyl mercury to Mr. Michell, but Mr. Michell repeatedly asked to purchase it and said that he would "continue to regularly buy" dimethyl mercury. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 11-16). Dimethyl mercury is highly toxic and a single drop may threaten someone's life. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 23). Contrary to Mr. Michell's claims, dimethyl mercury is not used for gold extraction. It has few legitimate applications and is primarily used for chemical research. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 23). Mr. Michell purchased one hundred grams of potassium cyanide, which is enough to poison many individuals if mixed in a drinkable liquid. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 24). Although an individual may legally possess potassium cyanide, the affiant, who is experienced as the Phoenix Division Weapons of Mass Destruction Coordinator, said that these activities established probable cause that Mr. Michell was illegally acquiring, possessing, or using a toxic chemical for a prohibited purpose. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶¶ 1-2).

Magistrate Judge Bade rightfully considered the totality of the circumstances and relied on the training and experience of law enforcement [*7]  when interpreting otherwise legal conduct. United States v. Ocampo, 937 F.2d 485, 490 (9th Cir. 1991); United States v. Gil, 58 F.3d 1414, 1418 (9th Cir. 1995). In review of the above facts, Judge Bade had a substantial basis to authorize the search of Defendant Michell's for materials associated with chemical weapons.



B. Firearms and Ammunition
The warrant application also listed 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) as a basis for its search. This section prohibits certain individuals, including those who have "been convicted in any court of . . . a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year" from possessing any firearm or ammunition. The warrant application stated that Mr. Michell was convicted of three felony violations before he posted photographs on the internet of himself shooting rifles. (Doc. 36, Exh. 1, SW ¶ 26-28, 31). On review, the government admitted that this statement was inaccurate, and that only one of the felony convictions occurred before the photographs were posted on the internet.

To challenge a warrant on the basis of a false statement, a defendant must show that the false statement is necessary to the finding of probable cause. Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 172, 98 S. Ct. 2674, 57 L. Ed. 2d 667 (1978). The mistake is immaterial if "there remains sufficient content in the warrant affidavit to support a finding of probable cause" after the mistake is set aside. Id. [*8] 

Although Mr. Michell rightfully points out that he was convicted of the last two of his felony convictions after the photographs were taken, the first of these felony convictions occurred in 1996 when Mr. Michell was convicted of aggravated assault and received a two year sentence. (Doc. 36, Exh. 2). Independent of the subsequent felonies, this felony conviction made Mr. Michell a prohibited possessor, and the mistake in the warrant application is immaterial. The photographs of him shooting a rifle and the caption that he had an AR-10 battle rifle therefore support a substantial basis for a warrant searching his residence for evidence that Mr. Michell was a felon in illegal possession of a firearm or ammunition.

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Defendant Ryan Patrick Michell's Motion to Suppress (Doc. 31) is DENIED.

Dated this 5th day of June, 2018.

/s/ G. Murray Snow

Honorable G. Murray Snow

United States District Judge

. 1. TREATMENT OF THE MOTIONS
The two Motions to Dismiss are virtually identical. This isn't surprising, because the two complaints they attack are virtually identical, alleging the same six claims and the same basic facts. The parties have not pointed out any distinctions that suggest that the Court should treat the Motions to Dismiss differently. The Court analyzes the Shin Motion to Dismiss, but the Court's reasoning (and ultimate holding) applies to the Cao Motion to Dismiss equally.



2. LEGAL STANDARD
A court will grant a motion to dismiss if the complaint does not allege claims upon which relief can be granted. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). A complaint must contain "a short and plain statement of the claim showing that [*4]  the pleader is entitled to relief." Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2). A claim to relief must be plausible on its face. Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). "A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009). In analyzing the complaint's sufficiency, a court must "accept[] all factual allegations in the complaint as true and constru[e] them in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Skilstaf, Inc. v. CVS Caremark Corp., 669 F.3d 1005, 1014 (9th Cir. 2012).

Fraud claims require more. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b) ("In alleging fraud or mistake, a party must state with particularity the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake."). "The plaintiff must set forth what is false or misleading about a statement, and why it is false." In re GlenFed, Inc. Sec. Litig., 42 F.3d 1541, 1548 (9th Cir. 1994). Stated differently, a plaintiff must plead the "who, what, when, where, and how" of the alleged misconduct. Cooper v. Pickett, 137 F.3d 616, 627 (9th Cir. 1997).

In analyzing the complaint's sufficiency, a court must "accept[] all factual allegations in the complaint as true and constru[e] them in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Skilstaf, Inc. v. CVS Caremark Corp., 669 F.3d 1005, 1014 (9th Cir. 2012).



3. BACKGROUND
The Court accordingly accepts the factual allegations in the Shin First Amended Complaint as true here. (See Dkt. No. 26.)

Defendants ran a bitcoin mining scheme. (Id. at 7:11-17.) Specifically, [*5]  Defendants said they designed and produced ASIC chips for use as cryptocurrency miners. (Id.) Defendants then promised investors who leased one of these chips that they would get daily revenue from the mining. (Id.) Defendants also promised these investors that they'd get commissions for bringing other investors into the scheme. (Id.)

The scheme was a scam. (Id. at 9:5-11:2.) Defendants didn't design or produce ASIC chips. (Id.) Defendants didn't have ASIC chips to lease. (Id.) Investors like the Shin Plaintiffs didn't receive the promised payments. (Id.) The commissions didn't materialize. (Id.)

The Shin Plaintiffs sued Defendants. They've asserted six claims: fraud—intentional misrepresentation; (2) fraud—false promise; (3) negligent misrepresentation; 4) breach of oral contract; (5) breach of implied in fact contract; and (6) promissory estoppel. (See Dkt. No. 26.)



4. ANALYSIS
To borrow a phrase, there are two things wrong with Defendants' moving papers. One is their style. The other is their substance. See Fred Rodell, Goodbye to Law Reviews, 23 Va. L. Rev. 38, 38 (1936). Although these two issues overlap, the Court addresses each in turn. The Court notes that this isn't the first time it has expressed concern [*6]  about Defendants' counsel's advocacy. (See, e.g., Dkt. No. 37 at 2 (discussing Defendants' "convoluted" requests for judicial notice); id. at 7 ("Defendants' Opposition takes many positions unsupported by facts and offers little convincing argument."); id. ("The Court has serious concerns about the candidness of Defendants' representations and does not readily see in the record support for assertions like the ones mentioned.").)



4.1 Style
Defendants' moving papers are full of sloppy typos, grammatical mistakes, incomplete sentences, and poorly structured paragraphs. Here are just five examples. All errors are Defendants' and the Court does not note "sic's."

• "There are no pleadings at all relevant to TIME SQUARED GROUP INC., a Washington corporation; and SMGLOBAL, INC., a Washington corporation. Why are they not dismissed." (Dkt. No. 39-1 at 2:23-24.)

• "[I]nvestors were romised daily revenues from the mining of Bitcoin by eac chip daily . . . ." (Id. at 3:4-6.)

• "What representations as opposed to mere opinions, were false when made." (Id. at 5:13-14.)

• "Whether later in hind site they were not carried out, does not constitute a fraud." (Id. at 6:19-20.)

• "The allegations would put Plaintiff in a better [*7]  position than performance of the opinion would have put them in." (Id. at 9:27-28.)

These issues are particularly severe in the analysis portions of Defendants' papers. (But see also id. at 1 (caption misspelling Shin Plaintiff's name as "Jooh Shin"); id. at 2:9-10 (citing Ashcroft v. "Igbal"); Dkt. No. 57 at 2:7 (again citing Ashcroft v. "Igbal").)
Typically, the Court would easily forgive isolated instances of such issues. The Court cares about excellent justice, not petty pedantry. But Defendants' papers are bad enough to merit mention. Perhaps above all else, lawyers are professional communicators. They're supposed to create clarity from chaos. Counsel isn't answering this call. Instead, his errors are getting in the way of his advocacy. These issues are particularly troubling given that Defendants were in the driver's seat here: they chose to file their Motions to Dismiss.



4.2 Substance
The substance of Defendants' papers isn't any better. Many of the issues described in Section 4.1 affect the Court's ability to comprehend Defendants' arguments. There are also substantive issues, such as Defendants' citation to California state case law, California statutes, and the California Rules of Court for pleading [*8]  standards. (See, e.g., Dkt. No. 39-1 at 17-28; Dkt. No. 57 at 2:10-12.) "The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure govern the sufficiency of a pleading in federal actions, even those based on diversity jurisdiction." Schwarzer et al., California Practice Guide: Federal Civil Procedure Before Trial, ¶ 8:70 (2015). Again, these issues are particularly troubling given that Defendants were in the driver's seat here in yet another way: they chose to bring this case to federal court.

But having fought through these issues, the Court finds inadequate substance to Defendants' arguments. Defendants themselves spend significant ink identifying many of the allegations that satisfy Rule 8's pleading standard. (See, e.g., Dkt. No. 39-1 at 2:25-4:7.) Defendants also ignore many of the allegations in the First Amended Complaint that add further detail. Further, many of Defendants' arguments improperly get to the merits of the case, not the adequacy of the pleadings. (See, e.g., id. at 8:22-23 ("The allegations do not show that the conduct of some unidentified party was intentional.").) That isn't what a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim is about. At oral argument, Defendants indicated that Plaintiffs' [*9]  alter ego allegations were exceptionally sparse. This just isn't true. (See, e.g., Dkt. No. 26 at 4:5-6 ("LEE and PARK, at all times herein mentioned were members and had control of TSGLLC."), 4:26 ("TSGINC failed to maintain corporate books . . . ."), 5:3-5 ("LEE, PARK, and TSGINC, and each of them, have commingled funds used for defendants LEE's and PARK's personal expenses . . . ."), 6:18-19 (SMG is grossly undercapitalized . . . .").)

Plaintiffs have alleged each element of each claim adequately enough to get through the courthouse doors, even considering the heightened pleading requirements for fraud cases. Defendants certainly haven't persuasively argued otherwise.



5. DISPOSITION
The Court DENIES the Motions to Dismiss. BACKGROUND
This case was filed on July 23, 2013, against Defendants Trendon T. Shavers ("Shavers") and Bitcoin Savings and Trust ("BTCST") (Dkt. #1). The question currently before the Court is whether or not it has subject-matter jurisdiction over this action pursuant to Sections 20 and 22 of the Securities Act of 1933 (the "Securities Act") [15 U.S.C. §§ 77t and 77v] and Sections 21 and 27 of the Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act") [15 U.S.C. §§ 78u and 78aa].

On August 5, 2013, the Court conducted a hearing at which Shavers orally challenged the Court's subject-matter jurisdiction over this case (Dkt. #21). At that time, Shavers appeared pro se, and the Court considered his arguments, finding that the Court had subject-matter jurisdiction over this action (Dkt. #23). At the hearing, Shavers argued primarily that the BTCST investments are not securities because Bitcoin is not money, and Bitcoin is not, and cannot be, regulated by the United States. Shavers also argued that his transactions were all Bitcoin transactions, and that no money ever exchanged hands. The Securities and Exchange Commission [*3]  ("SEC") argued that the BTCST investments met the definition of a "security" because they were both investment contracts and notes.

In relevant part, the Court found that the BTCST investments met the definition of an investment contract because the investments were: (1) an investment of money, (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with the expectation that profits will be derived from the efforts of the promoter or a third party. SEC v. W.J. Howey & Co., 328 U.S. 293, 298-99, 66 S. Ct. 1100, 90 L. Ed. 1244 (1946); Long v. Shultz Cattle Co, 881 F.2d 129, 132 (1989). The Court noted that Bitcoin could be used as money or currency, there was a common enterprise in that investors were dependent on Shavers' expertise in Bitcoin markets and his local connections to gain the expected interest, and that the investors expected profits to be obtained from the efforts of Shavers.

Shavers is now represented by counsel, and on June 5, 2014, Defendants' Motion for Reconsideration of Court Opinion Doc 23 (Dkt. #46) was filed, along with the Declaration of Franklin Jason Seibert in Support of Defendants' Response to Order to Show Cause Why Rule 37 Sanctions Should Not Be Imposed (Dkt. #47).1Link to the text of the note On June 18, 2014, the SEC filed its response (Dkt. #60). On June 24, 2014, Defendants filed their reply (Dkt. #62). On July 11, 2014, the SEC filed a Notice [*4]  of Supplemental Authority in Support of Plaintiff's Response in Opposition to Defendants' Renewed 12(b)(1) Motion (Dkt. #67). On July 14, 2014, the Court held a hearing on this matter where it heard oral argument from counsel for both the SEC and Defendants (Dkt. #69). In addition, the parties consented to proceed before the undersigned for trial (Dkt. #71, #72). With permission of the Court, on August 1, 2014, Defendants filed a Supplemental Filing to Motion for Reconsideration of Court Opinion Doc 23 Regarding Subject-Matter Jurisdiction and Renewed Rule 12(b)(1) Motion (Dkt. #74). On August 22, 2014, the SEC filed an Unopposed Motion for Leave to Submit Supplemental Authority in Support of Plaintiff's Response in Opposition to Defendants' Renewed 12(b)(1) Motion (Dkt. #75).2Link to the text of the note This motion was granted by the Court (Dkt. #76).

The factual allegations underlying this case have remained the same throughout, and are undisputed by Defendants. Shavers is an individual residing in McKinney, Texas, and is the founder and operator of BTCST, formerly known as First Pirate Savings & Trust. According to the facts stated by the SEC,3Link to the text of the note Shavers made a number of solicitations aimed at enticing lenders to invest in [*5]  Bitcoin-related investment opportunities.

Beginning in November of 2011, Shavers began advertising that he was in the business of "selling Bitcoin to a group of local people" and offered investors up to 1% interest daily "until either you withdraw the funds or my local dealings dry up and I can no longer be profitable" (Dkt. #3 at 3). During the relevant period, Shavers obtained at least 700,467 Bitcoin in principal investments from BTCST investors, or $4,592,806 in U.S. dollars, based on the daily average price of Bitcoin when the BTCST investors purchased their BTCST investments (Dkt. #3 at 4). The BTCST investors who suffered net losses (compared to investors who received more in withdrawals and purported interest payments than they invested in principal), collectively lost 263,104 Bitcoin in principal, that is $1,834,303 based on the daily average price of Bitcoin when they purchased their BTCST investments, or in excess of $23 million based on currently available Bitcoin exchange rates. Id.



LEGAL STANDARD

A. Motion to Reconsider
A motion seeking "reconsideration" may be construed under either Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59(e) or 60(b). Shepherd v. Int'l Paper Co., 372 F.3d 326, 328 n.1 (5th Cir. 2004); see also Milazzo v. Young, No. 6:11-cv-350-JKG, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71033, 2012 WL 1867099, at *1 (E.D. Tex. May 21, 2012). Such a motion "'calls into question [*6]  the correctness of a judgment.'" Templet v. HydroChem Inc., 367 F.3d 473, 478 (5th Cir. 2004) (quoting In Re Transtexas Gas Corp., 303 F.3d 571, 581 (5th Cir. 2002)).

"If a motion for reconsideration is filed within 28 days of the judgment or order of which the party complains, it is considered to be a Rule 59(e) motion; otherwise, it is treated as a Rule 60(b) motion." Milazzo, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71033, 2012 WL 1867099, at *1; see Shepherd, 372 F.3d at 328 n.1; Berge Helene Ltd. v. GE Oil & Gas, Inc., No. H-08-2931, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 19865, 2011 WL 798204, at *2 (S.D. Tex. Mar. 1, 2011)). A Rule 59(e) motion is "not the proper vehicle for rehashing evidence, legal theories, or arguments that could have been offered or raised before the entry of judgment." Templet, 367 F.3d at 479 (citing Simon v. United States, 891 F.2d 1154, 1159 (5th Cir. 1990)). "Rule 59(e) 'serve[s] the narrow purpose of allowing a party to correct manifest errors of law or fact or to present newly discovered evidence.'" Id. (quoting Waltman v. Int'l Paper Co., 875 F.2d 468, 473 (5th Cir. 1989)). "Relief under Rule 59(e) is also appropriate when there has been an intervening change in the controlling law." Milazzo, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71033, 2012 WL 1867099, at *1 (citing Schiller v. Physicians Resource Grp., 342 F.3d 563, 567 (5th Cir. 2003)). "Altering, amending, or reconsidering a judgment is an extraordinary remedy that courts should use sparingly." Id. (citing Templet, 367 F.3d at 479). "The alternative, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b)(6) states, 'On motion and just terms, the court may relieve a party or its legal representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons: [...] (6) any other reason that justifies relief." Id.



B. Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject-Matter Jurisdiction
Defendants move to dismiss based on Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1). The Court has subject-matter jurisdiction over those cases arising under [*7]  federal law. U.S. Const. Art. III § 2, cl. 1; 28 U.S.C. § 1331. A case arises under federal law if the complaint establishes that federal law creates the cause of action or the plaintiff's right to relief necessarily depends on the resolution of a substantial question of federal law. Empire Healthchoice Assur., Inc. v. McVeigh, 547 U.S. 677, 689-90, 126 S. Ct. 2121, 165 L. Ed. 2d 131 (2006).

A motion under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) should be granted only if it appears beyond doubt that Plaintiff cannot prove a plausible set of facts in support of its claim. Lane v. Halliburton, 529 F.3d 548, 557 (5th Cir. 2008) (citing Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 556-57, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007)). The Court may find a plausible set of facts by considering: "(1) the complaint alone; (2) the complaint supplemented by the undisputed facts evidenced in the record; or (3) the complaint supplemented by undisputed facts plus the court's resolution of disputed facts." Lane, 529 F.3d at 557 (quoting Barrera-Montenegro v. United States, 74 F.3d 657, 659 (5th Cir. 1996)). The Court will accept all well-pleaded allegations in the complaint as true, and construe those allegations in a light most favorable to Plaintiff. Truman v. United States, 26 F.3d 592, 594 (5th Cir. 1994). The party asserting jurisdiction bears the burden of proof for a 12(b)(1) motion to dismiss. Ramming, 281 F.3d at 161. "A case is properly dismissed for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction when the court lacks the statutory or constitutional power to adjudicate the case." CleanCOALition v. TXU Power, 536 F.3d 469, 473 (5th Cir. 2008) (quoting Home Builders Ass'n of Miss., Inc. v. City of Madison, 143 F.3d 1006, 1010 (5th Cir. 1998)).



ANALYSIS

A. Defendants' Motion to Reconsider
Defendants request that this Court reconsider its prior ruling regarding [*8]  subject-matter jurisdiction in this case. Although Defendants state that the motion is brought pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b), this is not an appropriate mechanism for a motion to reconsider in this case. Rule 54(b) involves the entry of judgment on multiple claims or involving multiple parties, and does not address motions to reconsider orders of the Court. However, as stated above, such motion may be brought pursuant to Rule 59(e) or Rule 60(b). "If a motion for reconsideration is filed within 28 days of the judgment or order of which the party complains, it is considered to be a Rule 59(e) motion; otherwise, it is treated as a Rule 60(b) motion." Milazzo, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71033, 2012 WL 1867099, at *1. In this case, Defendants' filed their motion for reconsideration 303 days after the undersigned entered its Memorandum Opinion Regarding the Court's Subject Matter Jurisdiction (Dkt. #23; #46). This motion will be treated as a Rule 60(b) motion.

Rule 60(b) provides, "the court may relieve a party... from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:

(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;

(2) newly discovered evidence that, with reasonable diligence, could not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule 59(b);

(3) fraud..., misrepresentation, or misconduct by an opposing party; [*9] 

(4) the judgment is void;

(5) the judgment has been satisfied, release or discharged...; or

(6) any other reason that justifies relief.

Defendants contend that the order of the Court should be reconsidered due to the Court's improper reliance "upon a second-year law student's law review article" and "new guidance from federal and state agencies regarding the nature of Bitcoin" (Dkt. #46 at 2). The SEC contends that Defendants present no new facts or newly discovered evidence, and that the Court made no manifest errors of law in its decision. The SEC argues that Defendants' motion should be denied because "Defendants merely re-urge an argument the Court already rejected after considering facts and law that have not changed" (Dkt. #60 at 14).
As a preliminary note, the Court did not rely solely, or even primarily, on a law review article written by a second-year law student in its opinion (See Dkt. #23 at 1-2 (citing Derek A. Dion, I'll Glady Trade You Two Bits on Tuesday for a Byte Today: Bitcoin, Regulating Fraud in the E-Conomy of Hacker-Cash, 2013 U. Ill. J.L. Tech & Pol'y 165, 167 (2013)). The portions of the law review article cited by the Court were in reference to the definition and description of Bitcoin. In fact, at the hearing, [*10]  Defendants' counsel stated that he agreed with the definition provided by the Court as taken from the law review article in question. However, the Court does acknowledge that "[c]hallenges to subject-matter jurisdiction can of course be raised at any time prior to final judgment." Grupo Dataflux v. Atlas Global Group, L.P., 541 U.S. 567, 571, 124 S. Ct. 1920, 158 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2004) (citation omitted). Thus, under Rule 60(b)(6), which allows the Court to reconsider an order for "any other reason that justifies relief," the Court finds Defendants' motion to reconsider is granted. The Court will now turn to the question of subject-matter jurisdiction.



B. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject-Matter Jurisdiction
The definition of "security" under Section 2(a)(1) of the Securities Act and Section 3(a)(10) of the Exchange Act is "any note, stock, treasury stock, security future, security-based swap, bond...[or] investment contract..." 15 U.S.C. § 77b; 15 U.S.C. § 77c(a)(10). The SEC contends that the BTCST investments qualify as both investment contracts and notes and, thus, are securities. Defendants contend that the BTCST investments are neither investment contracts, nor notes, and are not subject to the jurisdiction of this Court.

Defendants frame the main question currently facing the Court as: "Is Bitcoin Money?"; however, this is not the main issue before the Court. [*11]  The main question is whether the BTCST investments in this case meet the definition of a "security," specifically, are the BTCST investments an "investment contract" and/or a "note" as defined by relevant statutes and case law? While a discussion of whether the BTCST investments meet the definition of an investment contract as has been defined by law may entail a discussion of whether Bitcoin is money — this is not the main question for the Court to decide. It is also worth pointing out that the Court has not been asked to decide whether Bitcoin itself is a security, or whether the offer, sale, trade, or exchange of bitcoins constitutes the offer or sale of securities. Again, the question before the Court involves the particular BTCST investments offered by Defendants to BTCST investors.

An investment contract is any contract, transaction, or scheme involving (1) an investment of money, (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with the expectation that profits will be derived from the efforts of the promoter or a third party. Howey, 328 U.S. at 298-99; Long, 881 F.2d at 132. Defendants do not contest that their investors participated in a common enterprise with the expectation of profits, and challenge jurisdiction only on their contention [*12]  that bitcoins are not money and cannot represent an investment of money.

In Howey, the Supreme Court determined that "an investment contract for purposes of the Securities Act means a contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his money in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party, it being immaterial whether the shares in the enterprise are evidenced by formal certificates or by nominal interests in the physical assets employed in the enterprise." 328 U.S. at 298-99. The Supreme Court noted that this definition of an investment contract permitted the "fulfillment of the statutory purpose of compelling full and fair disclosure relative to the issuance of the many types of instruments that in our commercial world fall within the ordinary concept of a security." Id. at 299 (internal quotations and citations omitted). The Supreme Court went on to say that this definition "embodies a flexible rather than a static principle, one that is capable of adaptation to meet the countless and variable schemes devised by those who seek the use of the money of others on the promise of profits." Id. In Howey, the Supreme Court considered investments [*13]  of individuals in a small tract of land used as a citrus grove, and found that they were offered more than just the sale of land, but were enticed by the opportunity to contribute money and to share in the profits of a large citrus fruit enterprise. Id. The Supreme Court concluded the following:

[A]ll the elements of a profit-seeking business venture are present here. The investors provide the capital and share in the earnings and profits; the promoters manage, control and operate the enterprise. It follows that the arrangements whereby the investors' interests are made manifest involve investment contracts, regardless of the legal terminology in which such contracts are clothed.

Id. at 300. Thus, it is clear that the Supreme Court in Howey did not present a single, determinative factor in defining "investment contract," but rather looked to the investment package as a whole, including the ways in which the investment was marketed to investors.
Defendants argue that in order to satisfy the definition of an "investment contract," bitcoins must be considered money, which Defendants appear to equate to legal tender. The Court disagrees. "[I]t is well established that cash is not the only form of contribution [*14]  or investment that will create an investment contract." Uselton v. Commercial Lovelace Motor Freight, Inc., 940 F.2d 564, 574 (10th Cir. 1991). In fact, the "investment" may take the form of "goods and services," or some other "exchange of value." Id. (internal citations omitted). Indeed, case law from around the country supports this proposition. See, e.g., Int'l Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Daniel, 439 U.S. 551, 99 S. Ct. 790, 58 L. Ed. 2d 808 (1979) (indicating that an employee benefit plan could be a security but finding that the particular one in question was not); Uselton, 940 F.2d at 574 (voluntary, contributory employee plan was a security); SEC v. Int'l Heritage, Inc., 4 F. Supp. 2d 1378, 1382-1383 (N.D. Ga. 1998) (labor can satisfy the investment requirement); Feret v. CoreStates Fin. Corp., No. 97-6757, 1998 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 11512, 1998 WL 426560, at *13-*14 (E.D. Pa. July 27, 1998) (employee stock option plan was a security); Frazier v. Manson, 484 F. Supp. 449, 452 n.5 (N.D. Tex. 1980) (investment contract established where plaintiff did not invest money in limited partnerships, but received limited partnership interest in return for services performed); SEC v. Addison, 194 F. Supp. 709 (N.D. Tex. 1961) (investment of services can trigger securities laws); but see, Peyton v. Morrow Electronics, Inc., 587 F.2d 413 (9th Cir. 1978) (investment of services did not support the existence of a security); cf. Matassarin v. Lynch, 174 F.3d 549 (5th Cir. 1999) (mandatory, non-contributory stock option plan was not a security).

The cases reviewed by the Court indicate that the primary consideration in determining whether the investment requirement for finding a security has been met is whether the purchaser was required to give up something of value in exchange for the promised consideration. The [*15]  determining factor is whether an investor "chose to give up a specific consideration in return for a separable financial interest with the characteristics of a security." Teamsters, 439 U.S. at 559. Without yet turning to the question of whether Bitcoin is money, the Court is easily able to determine that Bitcoin constitutes something of value. Defendants argue that Bitcoin is a value transport protocol and carries with it only the value that someone is willing to pay for the Bitcoin. The Court finds that the actual value of Bitcoin, or whether the value of Bitcoin is measured in U.S. dollars, Euros, or some other way of measuring value, is irrelevant. Further, contrary to Defendants' assertion, there is no requirement that the "investment of money" prong must be satisfied by an investment of cash, or currency that amounts to legal tender. In Teamsters, the Supreme Court specifically stated "[t]his is not to say that a person's 'investment,' in order to meet the definition of an investment contract, must take the form of cash only, rather than of goods or services." Id. at 560 n.12. Even if the Court accepts Defendants' contention that Bitcoin is more akin to property rather than money, Bitcoin still satisfies the "investment of [*16]  money" prong of the Howey test. For example, in order to participate in Defendants' investment scheme, investors were required to give up a specific consideration, Bitcoin,4Link to the text of the note in return for the promised consideration, which was the 7% return on their investment brought about by the efforts of Shavers. As noted above, the definition of "investment contract" set out by the Supreme Court "embodies a flexible rather than a static principle, one that is capable of adaptation to meet the countless and variable schemes devised by those who seek the use of the money of others on the promise of returns." Id. at 299. Again, the Court finds that the BTCST investments in this case meet the definition of "investment contract" set forth in Howey.

Turning now to the question of whether Bitcoin is money, the Court first looks to the ordinary meaning of the word money. Defendants assert that in order to constitute money, Bitcoin must be considered legal tender. There is simply no evidence to support this contention, and the cases cited above demonstrate that there can be an investment contract even when there is no exchange of legal tender. The SEC relies on the following definition of money: "anything that functions [*17]  as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, and a store of value" (Dkt. #60 at 9 (citing WIKIPEDIA, http://en.wikipedia.org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/wiki/Money (last visited June 13, 2014)). Merriam-Webster's Dictionary similarly defines money as: "Something generally accepted as a medium of exchange, a measure of value, or a means of payment." MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY, http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/money (last visited August 25, 2014). The SEC and Defendants agree that Bitcoin is a measure of value, can be used as a means of payment, and, while perhaps not generally accepted as a medium of exchange, is accepted by some vendors as a medium of exchange.

Defendants urge the Court to consider IRS Notice 2014-21, which they assert finds that Bitcoin is property — not money. The IRS statement refers to Bitcoin as a "convertible virtual currency," and acknowledges that Bitcoin can operate "like 'real' currency — i.e., the coin and paper money of the United States or of any other country that is designated as legal tender... but it does not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction" (Dkt. #47, Ex. 2 at 1). The IRS Notice states that for federal tax purposes, virtual currency is treated as property. Id. at 2. However, in reporting virtual currency to the IRS, "a taxpayer who receives virtual currency [*18]  as payment for goods or services must, in computing gross income, include the fair market value of the virtual currency, measured in U.S. dollars." Id. at 2-3. "[W]hen a taxpayer successfully 'mines' virtual currency, the fair market value of the virtual currency as of the date of receipt is includible in gross income." Id. at 4. The IRS guidance indicates that Bitcoin received by "mining" or as payment to an independent contractor is taxable as self-employment income, and Bitcoin paid to an employee by an employer constitutes wages and is subject to federal income tax withholding, and other federal taxes. Id. at 4-5. Bitcoins received as wages must be reported on Form W-2. Id. at 5. However, the IRS Notice did not make any determinations about whether bitcoins are money or not, only that for federal tax purposes, bitcoins are to be treated as property. At oral argument, the SEC noted that there is nothing inconsistent with the IRS treating bitcoins in this manner, since the form requires the filer to choose one of two options — whether the person is dealing with a foreign currency exchange or a property. In twenty-three places throughout the IRS Code, money is referred to as property. Thus, the Court finds no reason to conclude, [*19]  based on IRS Notice 2014-21, that Bitcoin is not money. In fact, the IRS definition and guidance seem to point the Court towards the similarities between money and Bitcoin for federal tax purposes.

Defendants next rely on the Department of the Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Guidance FIN-2013-G001, which states, "[i]n contrast to real currency, 'virtual' currency is a medium of exchange that operates like a currency in some environments, but does not have all the attributes of real currency. In particular, virtual currency does not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction" (Dkt. #47, Ex. 3 at 1). This guidance goes on to clarify that administrators or exchangers of a virtual currency are money services businesses, specifically, money transmitters, subject to registration, reporting, and record-keeping regulations. Again, this guidance demonstrates that virtual currencies, like Bitcoin, are being treated like money for purposes of federal regulation.

Turning next to the Texas Department of Banking, Defendants argue that the State of Texas rejected Bitcoin as money or an enforceable claim in court. However, the Texas Department of Banking actually determined that exchangers and transmitters [*20]  of a virtual currency need not be licensed in Texas as currency exchangers or money transmitters because the definitions of "currency" and "money" under the Texas Finance Code are restricted to the legal tender of the United States or another country (Dkt. #47, Ex. 4 at 2-3). This makes sense, given the legislative definition of "currency" and "money" to which the Texas Department of Banking is restricted. In addition, Defendants point to California Assembly Bill 129 in support of their contention that Bitcoin is not currency, but property. California Assembly Bill 129 "makes clarifying changes to current law to ensure that various forms of alternative currency such as digital currency, points, coupons, or other objects of monetary value do not violate the law when those methods are used for the purchase of goods and services or the transmission of payments" (Dkt. #74, Ex. 1 at 1). This legislation puts digital or cryptocurrencies in the same category as "community currencies." Defendants compare Bitcoin to Starbucks Rewards points or airline miles. After looking at these various treatments of Bitcoin, the Court finds that these various legislatures and agencies are characterizing [*21]  Bitcoin as best they can within the framework of the regulations they have without further legislative guidance regarding the treatment of Bitcoin. However, none of these sources classified Bitcoin or gave an opinion regarding its treatment for purposes of Federal Securities laws.

Finally, since this Court's prior opinion on subject-matter jurisdiction, a few other courts have recognized that Bitcoin is money with regard to various federal statutes. See, e.g., United States v. Ulbricht, 31 F. Supp. 3d 540, 2014 WL 3362059 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) (concluding that Bitcoin is money within the context of the federal anti-money laundering statute); United States v. Faiella, 39 F. Supp. 3d 544 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) (concluding that Bitcoin is money within the context of 18 U.S.C. § 1960 and the United States' allegations that the defendant operated as an unlicensed money transmitting business).5Link to the text of the note

Based on the foregoing, the Court finds that Bitcoin has a measure of value, can be used as a form of payment, and is used as a method of exchange. As such, the Bitcoin investments in this case can satisfy the "investment of money" prong set out by the Supreme Court in Howey. While the Court recognizes that Bitcoin does not have legal tender status, the Court notes that [*22]  legal tender status is not required to establish that the investments at issue are investment contracts. Thus, the Court finds that the BTCST investments in this case are "investment contracts" and "securities" for purposes of federal securities law. Thus, the Court finds that it has subject-matter jurisdiction over this case.

Defendants next argue that if Bitcoin is money, then it is exempt from regulation by the Commission. However, this argument misstates the central finding that the Court must make, which is whether the BTCST investments in this case were securities. No one is arguing that Bitcoin itself is the security at issue in this case, as noted by the SEC in its brief. Thus, this argument does not apply.

Defendants also argue that, under Howey, "when the purchaser is motivated by a desire to use or consume the item purchased, the transaction is not a security," and, thus, because the BTCST investors had every intention of using their Bitcoin, the investments they purchased are not securities (Dkt. #46 at 11-12). As the SEC points out, Howey drew a distinction between the purchase of a fee simple interest in an orange grove (not a security) and the purchase of an orange grove [*23]  coupled with a contract entitling the purchaser to share in profits of a larger citrus fruit enterprise managed by others (a security). 328 U.S. at 299-300; see Long, 896 F.2d at 87 (investment contract found where heads of cattle purchased together with management contract); cf. United Housing Found., Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837, 852-53, 95 S. Ct. 2051, 44 L. Ed. 2d 621 (1975) (no investment contract where purchasers of cooperative housing project motivated by desire to find place to live, not by financial returns on investments). Here, the BTCST investors purchased interests in Defendants' operation trading bitcoins against the U.S. dollar, and did not use, consume, or occupy Defendants' trading operation. Defendants' investors were primarily interested in the return on their investments and any financial gain, and the fact that they may have later used or consumed their bitcoins is irrelevant. Further, accepting Defendants' argument would mean that any investment of money would fail the Howey test if an investor would eventually spend the profits made from his or her investments. Thus, the Court finds Defendants' argument unpersuasive.



CONCLUSION6Link to the text of the note
Based on the foregoing, the Court finds that Defendants' Motion for Reconsideration of Court Opinion Doc 23 (Dkt. #46) is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. The Court grants [*24]  Defendants' motion to reconsider its prior decision on subject-matter jurisdiction, but denies Defendants' 12(b)(1) motion to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

SIGNED this 26th day of August, 2014.

/s/ Amos L. Mazzant

AMOS L. MAZZANT

UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
This document contains Defendants' evidence in support of its position that other federal agencies and/or legislatures have not considered Bitcoin money.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendants indicated that they were unopposed to the filing of the motion for leave to submit supplemental authority, but object to the relevance of the supplemental authority.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
These facts were not challenged at the hearings on August 5, 2013, or July 14, 2014.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court also notes that, according to Defendants, there are three ways of obtaining Bitcoin. The first is to "mine" the Bitcoin using a complicated computer algorithm, which generates the Bitcoin. Defendants note that this takes a substantial amount of financial investment to obtain the computer equipment necessary, as well as the energy needed to power the computers. Defendants also note that this process will become more difficult the more bitcoins are mined. The second way to obtain Bitcoin is to purchase it. The third way to obtain Bitcoin is to sell something and accept payment in Bitcoin. All three ways of obtaining Bitcoin require an investment of money, as the process of "mining" Bitcoin requires money to purchase the needed equipment, purchasing Bitcoin through an exchange or otherwise requires a forms of currency in exchange for Bitcoin, and to obtain an item to sell and then accepting payment in Bitcoin requires the initial investment of obtaining the merchandise.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
As noted above, Defendants object to the relevance of the district court's opinion in Faiella submitted by the SEC as supplemental authority (See Dkt. #75). Defendants' objection is overruled, and the Court notes that it cited both the opinion in Ulbricht and Faiella for the simple proposition that other courts have found that Bitcoin is money in the context of other federal statutes not at issue in this case.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
The SEC also argues that the BTCST investments are notes; however, since the Court determined that the BTCST investments at issue are "investment contracts," this Court has subject-matter jurisdiction over this case. The Court will not address whether the BTCST investments are also notes.

 ORDER
ROSS, United States District Judge:

On December 1, 2017, Plaintiff Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") brought the instant action against Defendants PlexCorps (a/k/a and d/b/a PlexCoin and Sidepay.ca), Dominic Lacroix ("Lacroix"), and Sabrina Paradis-Royer ("Paradis-Royer," and with Lacroix, the "Individual Defendants"), alleging securities fraud in violation of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. § 77a et seq.; the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq.; and SEC Rule 10b-5, 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5.

The Complaint centers on so-called "PlexCoin Tokens" ("PlexCoin"), which are electronically stored assets dubbed as "cryptocurrency" or "digital currency." Although [*2]  they are not legal tender and lack the backing of any government, PlexCoin Tokens consist of secure computer data stored on an online network, and they represent financial value. The SEC generally contends that Defendants unlawfully participated in a fundraising scheme to amass more than $15 million from tens of thousands of investors who purchased PlexCoin.

That day, the Honorable Carol Bagley Amon, United States District Judge, entered an ex parte order directing Defendants to show cause why a preliminary injunction should not issue for the alleged securities violations. (D.E. # 10 ¶ 1.) In addition, Judge Amon issued an order "[t]emporarily freezing Defendants' assets, including but not limited to the accounts identified in" an attached exhibit, until she decided whether to issue a preliminary injunction. (Id. ¶ 2.) In relevant part, the freeze order provided:

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, pending a hearing [on the preliminary injunction], Defendants and each of their financial and brokerage institutions, agents, servants, employees, and attorneys, and those persons in active concert or participation with them who receive actual notice of [this] Order . . . , hold and retain within [*3]  their control and otherwise prevent any withdrawal, transfer, pledge, encumbrance, assignment, dissipation, concealment[,] or other disposal . . . of any assets, funds, or other property (including money, virtual currency[,] or other digital asset . . . in whatever form such assets may presently exist and wherever located) of, held by, or under the control of Defendants, whether held in their name or for their direct or indirect beneficial interest . . . , including but not limited to the assets listed in Schedule A.

(Id. at 9-10.) Schedule A listed the usernames of three accounts with the payment processing company Stripe and identified three unique alphanumeric pseudonyms associated with specific individuals who possess so-called "Bitcoin" or "Ethereum." Like PlexCoin, Bitcoin and Ethereum are digital assets representing financial value. Judge Amon found the freeze order necessary "to preserve the status quo and to protect the Court's ability to award relief in the form of disgorgement of ill-gotten gains, prejudgment interest and civil penalties." (Id.) On December 8, 2017, Judge Amon extended the temporary freeze order against the Individual Defendants, who consented, until the preliminary [*4]  injunction proceeding. (D.E. # 19 at 3.) On January 11, 2018, Judge Amon reaffirmed the extension on consent of the SEC and Individual Defendants. (D.E. # 32 at 2.)
Before this Court, as Miscellaneous Judge for the Eastern District, is the SEC's ex parte application for an order directing Lacroix to show cause why he should not be held in contempt and subject to sanctions for alleged violations of Judge Amon's temporary freeze order, as well as another temporary freeze order specifically naming three accounts purportedly related to Lacroix's violations. This Order addresses only the latter request, and the Court leaves the first request to Judge Amon.

The securities statutes provide that, in actions brought by the SEC, "a permanent or temporary injunction or restraining order shall be granted without bond." 15 U.S.C. §§ 77t(b), 78u(d)(1). Because it has "specific statutory authority to do so," Gucci Am., Inc. v. Weixing Li, 768 F.3d 122, 131 n.11 (2d Cir. 2014), this Court may issue temporary asset freeze orders so that, "in the event the SEC obtains a judgment, money will be available to satisfy that judgment," SEC v. Byers, No. 08-CV-7104 (DC), 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 59689, 2009 WL 33434, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 7, 2009). See also Smith v. SEC, 653 F.3d 121, 127-28 (2d Cir. 2011) (discussing asset freeze orders in SEC cases); SEC v. Manor Nursing Ctrs., Inc., 458 F.2d 1082, 1103-04 (2d Cir. 1972) (same). The freeze order also "preserve[s] the equitable remedies of a return of lost profits and an accounting [*5]  . . . ." Klipsch Grp., Inc. v. Big Box Store Ltd., No. 12-CV-6283 (AJN), 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 149507, 2012 WL 4901407, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 11, 2012). "It is well settled that the granting of a temporary injunction, pending final hearing, is within the sound discretion of the trial court . . . ." Deckert v. Independence Shares Corp., 311 U.S. 282, 290, 61 S. Ct. 229, 85 L. Ed. 189 (1940).

Currently, the parties are litigating whether the Court has personal jurisdiction over the Individual Defendants in this action. (See D.E. # 60.) Still, in issuing her initial temporary orders, Judge Amon found that, at least for purposes of temporary relief, the SEC has made a sufficient showing that this Court has personal jurisdiction over Lacroix for this action. This is law of the case. "Once personal jurisdiction of a party [for temporary relief] is obtained," this Court may freeze assets under the party's control regardless of "whether the property be within or without the United States." United States v. First Nat'l City Bank, 379 U.S. 378, 384, 85 S. Ct. 528, 13 L. Ed. 2d 365 (1965).

The Second Circuit repeatedly has emphasized the exceedingly light burden that the SEC must overcome in seeking a temporary asset freeze order. The SEC need show only that "an inference can be drawn that the party has" committed a violation. See Smith, 653 F.3d 121, 128 (2d Cir. 2011) (quoting Byers, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 59689, 2009 WL 33434, at *3); see also SEC v. Unifund SAL, 910 F.2d 1028, 1041 (2d Cir. 1990) (noting that temporary asset freeze orders may be granted, "even in circumstances where the elements required to support a traditional SEC injunction have not been established," [*6]  when "[t]here is a basis to infer" a violation).

The Court also must issue asset freeze orders in compliance with Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. See Gucci Am., 768 F.3d at 129-30 & n.9. Ordinarily, under Rule 65(b), the Court may issue temporary relief ex parte only if (1) "specific facts in an affidavit . . . clearly show that immediate and irreparable injury, loss, or damage will result to the movant before the adverse party can be heard in opposition," and (2) "the movant's attorney certifies in writing any efforts made to give notice and the reasons why it should not be required." If the Court issues such relief, the Court generally must, among other things, "state the reasons why [such relief] issued," "describe the injury," "state why it is irreparable," "state why the order was issued without notice," and "state its terms specifically," with "reasonable detail" and without references to pleadings or other court filings. Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(b)(2), 65(d)(1). However, in cases brought by the SEC, the agency need not make a showing of irreparable harm. See Smith, 653 F.3d at 127. The order expires "at the time after entry—not to exceed 14 days—that the [C]ourt sets." Id. 65(d)(1).

The Court has considered the exhibits to the SEC's ex parte application, the SEC's brief in support of the application, and prior [*7]  filings in this action. Based upon those documents, the Court finds that the SEC has shown at least a basis to infer the following:

1. Lacroix participated in a scheme to obtain more than $15 million in proceeds from unlawful activities related to PlexCoin, which constitute investment contracts subject to the securities statutes.

2. The Court has subject-matter jurisdiction over this action and personal jurisdiction over Lacroix. Venue also properly lies in the Eastern District.

3. Lacroix holds an account in his name at https://bylls.com , also known as "SatoshiPortal." The associated user number is 4732.

a. From December 29, 2017, to May 3, 2018, after Judge Amon had issued her temporary asset freeze order, Lacroix spent $5,113.35 from his SatoshiPortal account to make four payments to credit-card bills.

b. On January 5, 2018, Lacroix transferred $384.80 from his SatoshiPortal account to an individual named Carole Bolduc.

c. The five payments total $5,498.15. After Judge Amon had issued her temporary asset freeze order, Lacroix attained at least a portion of these funds by converting Bitcoin from accounts used to store assets that PlexCoin purchasers had provided to his fundraising scheme. [*8] 

4. Lacroix helped to create and controls a SatoshiPortal account in the name of his brother, Pascal Lacroix ("Pascal"). The associated user number is 7513.

a. Lacroix transferred Bitcoin out of accounts used to store assets that PlexCoin purchasers had provided to his fundraising scheme. Lacroix converted the Bitcoin to $30,969.47 and transferred the funds into Pascal's SatoshiPortal account. Lacroix used the money as a down payment so that InterAxe Inc. could lease a 2018 Mercedes-Benz GLE sports-utility vehicle in Montreal, Canada, on or about March 2, 2018. Lacroix serves as the principal shareholder, president, and secretary of InterAxe Inc.

5. Lacroix controls an account under Pascal's name at Tangerine Bank, a banking institution in Canada. The account number is 4007835593.

a. Starting no later than January 12, 2018 and lasting until April 26, 2018, at the earliest, Lacroix converted Bitcoin to $199,826.64, which he transferred from Pascal's SatoshiPortal account to Pascal's Tangerine Bank account. Lacroix derived at least a portion of the Bitcoin from accounts used to store assets that PlexCoin purchasers had provided to his fundraising scheme.

b. After Judge Amon had issued her [*9]  temporary asset freeze order, Pascal issued several checks under Lacroix's direction and from the Tangerine Bank account. Pascal issued two checks totaling $3,920.13 to a kitchen and fine custom cabinetry business for work in Quebec at 468 Rue des Manitobains, a two-floor residential property built in 2017 and owned by Lacroix. Pascal issued three checks totaling $6,543.26 to a surface decoration services company for work at 468 Rue des Manitobains. Finally, Pascal issued a check of $10,774.40 to a surround-sound installation services company for work at 468 Rue des Manitobains.

6. The SEC properly made its application ex parte because Lacroix would have continued to dissipate and conceal assets under his control—including moving funds to accounts under others' names but his control—if he received notice that the SEC is aware of his latest attempts to dissipate investor assets related to the PlexCoin fundraising scheme. The SEC's counsel also represented as much.

7. There is a grave risk that, if the SEC had provided Lacroix prior notice, he immediately would transfer assets beyond this Court's and the SEC's reach to avoid paying any final judgment that may issue in this action.

In light of these [*10]  findings, this Court cannot "be assured that [Lacroix] would not waste [his] assets prior to refunding . . . investors' money." Manor Nursing Ctrs., 458 F.2d at 1106. The Court finds that additional ancillary relief is necessary to maintain the status quo. Still, the Court finds it appropriate at this point to freeze assets only in the accounts described above, because Judge Amon has already issued a global asset freeze order. Accordingly, because the SEC has shown good cause, the Court GRANTS the SEC's ex parte application for a temporary freeze order directed specifically at Lacroix and the assets in his SatoshiPortal account, Pascal's SatoshiPortal account, and Pascal's Tangerine Bank account.

Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that, for 14 days after the entry of this Order, or as extended by Judge Amon upon showing of good cause or consent, Lacroix and each of his financial and brokerage institutions, agents, servants, employees, and attorneys—as well as those persons in active concert or participation with him who receive actual notice of this Order by personal service, facsimile service, telephonic notice, email notice, any other means permitted in this Order, or otherwise—hold and retain within their control and [*11]  otherwise prevent any withdrawal, transfer, pledge, encumbrance, assignment, dissipation, concealment, or other disposal (including the use of any credit cards or any other incurring of debt) of any assets, funds, or other property (including money, virtual currency or other digital asset, real or personal property, securities, commodities, choses in action, or other property of any kind whatsoever, in whatever form such assets may presently exist) of, held by, or under the control of Lacroix, whether held in his name or for his direct or indirect beneficial interest, in the following accounts:

1. SatoshiPortal/bylls.com Account with User Number 4732;

2. SatoshiPortal/bylls.com Account with User Number 7513; and

3. Tangerine Bank Account # 4007835593.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that a copy of this Order and the papers supporting the SEC's ex parte application, including the portions relating to its pending request for an Order to Show Cause, be served upon Lacroix on or before June 18, 2018, by transmitting it to Lacroix's most recent known address by Federal Express or other overnight service, or by delivery to his counsel of record. Lacroix is reminded that, pursuant to Judge Amon's temporary [*12]  orders, he and his agents are "enjoined and restrained . . . from destroying, altering, or concealing all documents, books, and records"—including those potentially related to the Order to Show Cause—"that are in the possession, custody, or control of Defendants," their agents, or their co-participants. (D.E. # 10 at 10-11; D.E. #32 at 2.)

SO ORDERED.

Issued at: 2:35 p.m.

June 15, 2018

Brooklyn, New York.

 I. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR REGULATION A+ OFFERINGS
Longfin first received SEC approval to publicly offer its shares on June 16, 2017, and engaged in a public offering after that date. This public offering took place pursuant to provisions in the Jumpstarting Our Business Startups Act of 2012 ("JOBS Act"), which amended our nation's securities laws. Pub. L. No. 112-106, 126 Stat. 306. Before describing the events at issue here, the pertinent statutory framework created by the JOBS Act will be outlined. [*3]  A more detailed description of the relevant legal standards follows the findings of fact.

The JOBS Act was designed in part to permit early-stage companies to raise capital from public offerings with less expense than normally accompanies initial public offerings ("IPOs"). Title IV of the JOBS Act directed the SEC to create an exemption from the registration requirements of Section 5 of the Securities Act for companies to publicly sell shares in an offering of securities in an amount up to $50 million with fewer requirements than those applicable generally to companies undertaking an IPO. 126 Stat. 306, 324 (codified at 15 U.S.C. § 77c). It provides in relevant part that:

The Commission shall by rule or regulation add a class of securities to the securities exempted pursuant to this section in accordance with the following terms and conditions: this motion shall be resolved. They have waived their rights to examine the declarants and any objections to the admissibility of the documents for purposes of this hearing.

(A) The aggregate offering amount of all securities offered and sold within the prior 12—month period in reliance on the exemption added in accordance with this paragraph shall not exceed $50,000,000.

(B) The securities [*4]  may be offered and sold publicly.

(C) The securities shall not be restricted securities within the meaning of the Federal securities laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

. . .

(E) The issuer may solicit interest in the offering prior to filing any offering statement, on such terms and conditions as the Commission may prescribe in the public interest or for the protection of investors.

. . .

(G) Such other terms, conditions, or requirements as the Commission may determine necessary in the public interest and for the protection of investors . . . .

Id. (emphasis supplied).
The SEC promulgated amendments to its Regulation A to provide for such offerings.2Link to the text of the note The amended regulation is now commonly referred to as "Regulation A+." Amendments for Small and Additional Issues Exemptions Under the Securities Act (Regulation A), Securities Act Release Nos. 33-9741, 34-74578, 39-2501, 80 Fed. Reg. 21,806 (Apr. 20, 2015) ("Regulation A+ SEC Release"). Under Regulation A+, there are two tiers of offerings: "Tier 1," for offerings under $20 million, and "Tier 2," for offerings under $50 million. Id. at 21,807. The SEC requires that, for both tiers, an offering circular be provided to prospective investors. 17 C.F.R. § 230.251. In addition, an offering statement [*5]  must be reviewed by the SEC, and "qualified" by their staff.3Link to the text of the note Id. Once the offering is qualified, the company, or "issuer," may sell shares to the public. Id.

Regulation A+ also streamlines the path to register shares that will be traded on public exchanges for Tier 2 offerings. To register a class of securities under Section 12 of the Exchange Act of 1934 ("Exchange Act") pursuant to Regulation A+ for a Tier 2 offering, the company need only file a short form registration statement ("Form 8-A") concurrently with the filing and qualification of other forms a company is required to file under Regulation A. 17 C.F.R. § 249.208a. Once a Form 8-A is effective, the company becomes subject to the Exchange Act reporting obligations required of all companies that trade on the public stock exchanges, and ceases to have duties to file the financial reports otherwise required under Regulation A+. See Regulation A+ SEC Release, 80 Fed. Reg. at 21,852-53; 17 C.F.R. § 230.257.4Link to the text of the note



II. FINDINGS OF FACT
Longfin's founder Meenavalli describes Longfin as an "independent financial technology company that specializes in trade commodity solutions." Longfin was incorporated on February 1, 2017 in Delaware, with Meenavalli, who is a citizen of [*6]  India and a resident of the Republic of Singapore, as its CEO. Longfin is now headquartered in New York City. According to Meenavalli, since its founding, Longfin has earned revenue from the sale of physical commodities and by providing services to customers that use its trading platform. Longfin represented to the SEC in 2017 that, as of February 28, 2017, it had total assets of $298,861 and liabilities of $293,827, with most of the assets consisting of trade receivables.



Altahawi Consulting Agreement
The day Longfin was incorporated it entered into a consulting agreement ("Agreement") with Altahawi's company Adamson Brothers Corp.5Link to the text of the note Meenavalli had met Altahawi in late 2016. Altahawi is a United States citizen and resides in Florida. Altahawi explains that he has over twenty-four years' experience in the securities industry.

According to the Agreement, Altahawi specializes in "Reg 'A' drafting and filings" and will assist Longfin "to initiate a "Reg 'A+' tier II Direct Public Offering ('DPO')."6Link to the text of the note Altahawi agreed to assist Longfin "for the sole purpose of filing Reg 'A' tier II qualification statement with the SEC." He agreed to draft an offering "for up to $50 million." The term of the Agreement [*7]  was set at twelve months.

For Altahawi's services, Longfin agreed to pay Altahawi $65,000 and stock in four components:

a. $25,000 deposit at signing this agreement in order to cover legal, Reg "A" qualification statement, drafting and managing the SEC process; and

b. The company shall pay $25,000 in 60 days of signing this agreement to cover the above; and

c. The remaining balance of $15,000 post the SEC qualification.

d. The company will pay the consultant 3% equality [sic] of the company's outstanding shares pre-offering covering the above.

Accordingly, Altahawi's services pursuant to the Agreement required him to "draft" and manage the SEC process for a Regulation A offering worth up to $50 million, including the duty to file a Tier 2 qualification statement with the SEC.
In a filing with the SEC made on March 10, 2017, Longfin disclosed the existence of the Agreement, and described it in the following terms.

The company has entered into an agreement with Mr. Andy Altahawi/Adamson Brothers for the provision of filing Reg A tier 2 and structuring for which Adamson Brothers will charge 3% of the issued shares post shares swap7Link to the text of the note after the successful completion of fund raising. Mr. Altahawi [*8]  is not affiliated with the company or its officers and directors in any way.

(Emphasis supplied.)


Announcement of Intent to Engage in IPO
On March 10, 2017, Longfin made a Form 1-A filing with the SEC indicating its intent to offer up to 20 million shares of its common stock on a "best efforts" basis. With each share priced at $2.50 per share, it intended to raise a maximum of $50 million for Longfin. The filings explained that the sale of shares would commence two days after the Offering Statement filed with the SEC "is qualified." It warned that there was currently no trading market for Longfin's common stock and that its securities were speculative and carried "significant" risks. It explained that as of February 28, it had 7.5 million shares outstanding.

In that same filing, Longfin announced that it had entered into an agreement to acquire a Singaporean company, Stampede Tradex Pte Ltd. ("Stampede Tradex"), through a "share swap." Longfin was to issue 100 million shares of its common stock to shareholders of Stampede Tradex in exchange for 100% of Stampede Tradex's stock, making Stampede Tradex a subsidiary of Longfin. The SEC filing explained that Stampede Tradex had been operating [*9]  since 2014, and had experienced a "significant" growth in its business. Longfin added that its "core business plan" was to utilize Stampede Tradex's technology, strategy, infrastructure and its business model, which was employed in the Asia Pacific region, for markets in the Americas, Europe, and Africa. The filing described Stampede Tradex as 55% owned by Stampede Capital Limited and 45% owned by Meenavalli.8Link to the text of the note

Attached to the filing was an independent auditor's report for Longfin for the month of February. The auditor was identified as AJSH & Co. LLP of New Delhi, India.

In a May 23, 2017 filing with the SEC, Longfin indicated that its offering would be for up to 10 million shares at $5 per share. It also indicated that the share swap arrangement had changed, such that Longfin would issue 50 million shares to Stampede Tradex's shareholders for 100% ownership in Stampede Tradex. The May 23 filing indicated that, after the share swap, the Longfin founders would hold 7.5 million shares, the Stampede Tradex shareholders would hold 50 million shares, and an additional 10 million shares would be held by the public, assuming that the IPO sold out.



SEC Qualification of Longfin's Offering
On June [*10]  16, 2017, the SEC qualified Longfin's Regulation A+ offering. The SEC authorized Longfin to begin selling up to 10 million shares to the public at a price of up to $5 per share. Therefore, if Longfin had completely sold out its offering, it would have raised $50 million, the maximum permissible under Tier 2 of Regulation A+.

The share swap arrangement with Stampede Tradex closed three days later, on June 19, 2017. After the share swap arrangement, Longfin had 67,500,000 total shares outstanding.



Altahawi Becomes Longfin's Secretary
In June 2017, Longfin asked Altahawi to become its corporate secretary, and Altahawi accepted. Altahawi was issued a company e-mail address and began signing corporate resolutions on behalf of Longfin. In a July 6 Offering Circular, Longfin disclosed that "Mr. Altahawi became an affiliated [sic] with the company and he is being considered to be part of our management team." On July 15, Altahawi, as corporate secretary, signed the certificate of adoption of the bylaws of Longfin. An August PowerPoint presentation listed Altahawi as a director of Longfin and point of contact for the company. On September 14, as corporate secretary, Altahawi signed a corporate [*11]  resolution transferring 3% of Longfin's stock to himself, amounting to just over 2 million shares of Longfin, "for the professional services rendered to the company since inception" (the "Consulting Shares"). The resolution authorized Longfin's transfer agent, Colonial Stock Transfer Co., Inc. ("Colonial Transfer"), to issue the shares to Altahawi "as compensation for his professional services." The resolution was also signed by Meenavalli and Longfin's CFO Krishanu Singhal. Altahawi was identified as well in the resolution as a member of Longfin's board of advisors.

Although Altahawi has submitted in opposition to this motion a resignation letter bearing the date September 1, 2017, which indicates that he resigned as corporate secretary as of September 1, 2017, that resignation letter was not effective.9Link to the text of the note As just described, Altahawi continued to act officially as Longfin's secretary for some time after September 1.



The Issuance of Longfin Shares Begins
According to the control log and escrow account records for Longfin, shares began to be issued to individual purchasers in small increments on September 1, 2017, with another batch issued in even smaller increments on October 16, 2017.10Link to the text of the note NASDAQ [*12]  initial listing requirements generally require approximately 300 individual holders of shares, as well as 1 million total publicly held shares.11Link to the text of the note

On September 15, Longfin disclosed that it had engaged Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc. ("Network 1") as lead underwriter for its DPO. As Longfin reported to the SEC, on September 25, it also agreed with Altahawi that Longfin would be listed on www.ipoflow.com, a website owned by Adamson Brothers, for "no additional compensation." Although Longfin had been authorized by the SEC in July to sell up to 10 million shares, between September 1 and December 11, 2017, Longfin claims to have issued only 1.14 million shares through its Regulation A+ DPO, and to have raised approximately $5.7 million.



The December 6 Shares
After a series of amendments to its SEC filings, but without disclosing any new financial information since February 2017, on November 22, 2017, Longfin registered its securities on a Form 8-A pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act. The Form 8-A became effective on November 24, 2017. With that registration in place, Longfin became eligible for listing on a public stock exchange.

On December 4, 2017, Altahawi sent an [*13]  e-mail with a subject line of "RE: Longfin — Shareholders List" to Colonial Transfer, asking it to share Longfin's current shareholder list with Network 1. Colonial Transfer responded by including not only the shareholder list, but also the records of payments received for those shares. It states:

Here are the issuances from each of the 3 closings from the offering. In addition, I've included the escrow reconciliation printout showing all the deposits that were received along with the remittances to Longfin.

Network 1 then responded: "Perfect. Thank you. Can you also send me a shareholders list as of today for NASDAQ."
On December 6, Altahawi sent the last e-mails in the record from the Longfin email address issued to him as secretary of Longfin. These emails were sent in the December 4 e-mail thread, with Altahawi writing that "I need to submit 24 subscriptions we need to issue the shares for as of today please." Shortly thereafter, Altahawi attached subscription agreements, first from eleven individuals, and then another thirteen. Longfin's share control log reflects that the twenty- four individuals were issued 409,360 shares of Longfin that same day (the "December 6 Shares"). The [*14]  control log shows that each of these issuances have an "R" notation, indicating that the issuance was of restricted shares. There is no evidence in the record that any payment was received by Longfin or Colonial Transfer for these 409,360 shares. The December 6 Shares are included in the 1.14 million shares Longfin claims to have issued through its DPO.

Two of the individuals who were issued shares on December 6 without any record of payment were defendants Penumarthi and Tammineedi. Penumarthi has known Meenavalli since childhood, having grown up with him in India. Penumarthi now resides in Dorset, United Kingdom. Penumarthi entered into a consulting arrangement with Longfin on July 1, 2017, which he asserts ended on September 30, 2017. Penumarthi's Facebook page stated that he was the Head of Operations for Longfin's United Kingdom operations. Penumarthi now states in his declaration that "[w]hile I was acting as a consultant, I referenced my role on my Facebook page inaccurately. In fact, I have never been the 'Head of Operations' of Longfin Corp." His subscription agreement is dated September 2, 2017. Penumarthi was issued 40,000 shares of restricted Longfin stock on December 6. [*15]  Colonial Transfer has no record that Penumarthi paid for these shares. Penumarthi's subscription agreement required payment to the escrow account maintained by Colonial Transfer for Longfin.

Tammineedi is a director of Stampede Capital Limited, a company that Meenavalli founded and that is Longfin's largest shareholder. Stampede Capital Limited owns well over 10% of Longfin's shares, and Meenavalli himself has a substantial interest in Stampede Capital Limited.12Link to the text of the note Tammineedi and Meenavalli are frequent business colleagues and close associates. Tammineedi resides in Telangana, India. His subscription agreement to purchase Longfin shares is dated September 25, 2017. Tammineedi was issued 30,000 shares of restricted Longfin stock on December 6. As is true for Penumarthi, Colonial Transfer has no record that Tammineedi paid for those shares. Tammineedi's subscription agreement also required payment to the escrow account maintained by Colonial Transfer for Longfin.



Listing on NASDAQ
On December 13, 2017, Longfin was listed on the NASDAQ stock exchange. The stock began trading at between $5-7/share.



Tammineedi Buys Shares on the Open Market
On December 13 and 14, Tammineedi purchased 67,000 shares [*16]  of Longfin on NASDAQ through a company called "Source Media" (the "Source Media Shares"), at an average price of approximately $5.50/share. Tammineedi is the sole officer and owner of Source Media.



Longfin's Acquisition of Ziddu.com
On December 15, 2017, two days after public trading began, Longfin announced that on December 11, it had acquired "Ziddu.com," an entity at least 92%-owned by Meenavalli. Longfin had not disclosed to the SEC during the Regulation A+ process that it intended to make this acquisition. Longfin publicly represented that Ziddu.com had expertise in blockchain and cryptocurrency technology. It stated that Ziddu.com was

a Blockchain technology empowered solutions provider that offers Microfinance Lending against Collateralized Warehouse Receipts in the form of Warehouse Coins to small and medium enterprises (SMEs), processors, manufacturers, importers and exporters using crypto currencies across continents.

Longfin's stock price and trading volume sky-rocketed. That day, December 15, Longfin's stock closed at $22.01/share, more than four times the previous day's closing price. On December 18, 2017, Longfin's stock price reached a high of $142.82/share before closing [*17]  at $72.38/share, which valued Longfin at over $3 billion. Over the next few months, Longfin shares generally traded in the $40-$60/share range. Longfin later advised the SEC that Ziddu.com had no revenue historically and its carrying value was zero.


Altahawi's Continued Actions on Behalf of Longfin
On December 18, 2017, Altahawi sent an e-mail to Colonial Transfer directing the issuance of 2.5 million Longfin shares to the entities owning Ziddu.com. Colonial Transfer promptly issued the shares. There is no indication that Altahawi did not have the authority to act in this manner on behalf of the company.

In late December 2017 and in January 2018, Altahawi had discussions with the SEC's staff on behalf of Longfin. The topics of these conversations included whether it would be possible for Longfin to increase the size of its offering, and seeking guidance on Longfin's Form 8-A.



Altahawi Acquires the Private Transaction Shares
On January 12, 2018, Altahawi acquired 121,000 shares of Longfin through purchases from ten of the twenty-four individuals who acquired shares on December 6 (the "Private Transaction Shares"). These shares were purportedly acquired at $30/share, but no payment records [*18]  appear in this record. $30 is approximately $10/share below their then-market price. Each of the ten individuals who transferred their shares to Altahawi apparently signed the same piece of paper. Counsel have represented that these ten individuals live in India. Altahawi then began selling the Private Transaction Shares on the NASDAQ in January and February 2018.



Tammineedi and Penumarthi Sell Shares
Tammineedi sold the Source Media Shares over the NASDAQ between December 15, 2017 and February 6, 2018 for approximately $2.7 million in profits. Between March 21, 2018 and March 28, 2018, Tammineedi sold 2,200 of his December 6 Shares on the NASDAQ of Longfin for $127,535 in proceeds.

On January 23, 2018, Penumarthi sold 4,000 shares of his December 6 Shares over the NASDAQ for $168,495. Penumarthi later bought and sold open market shares. On a net basis he sold approximately 36,000 shares, some of which included the December 6 Shares, and made an additional $2 million on those trades.



Altahawi Sells the Consulting Shares
In preparation for his sale of the Consulting Shares, Altahawi engaged Magri Law LLC on February 16, 2018, "to review my acquisition of the Consulting Shares." According [*19]  to Phillip Magri, he reviewed three documents that Altahawi provided to him: (1) Altahawi's representation letter, dated March 5, 2018; (2) the Agreement Altahawi signed with Longfin; and (3) Amendment No. 9 to Longfin's Form 1-A, filed on November 3, 2017. In his letter, Altahawi states that "I am not now an affiliate of the issuer as defined under Rule 144(a)(1) and have not been an affiliate during the preceding three months." He also asserts that the Consulting Shares "are fully paid for and a minimum of . . . One (1) Year in accordance with paragraph (d) of Rule 144." Amendment No. 9 states that Longfin has

entered into an agreement with Adamson Brothers Corp. in February 2017 pursuant to which Mr. Altahawi has provided the Company [Longfin] with legal and business development advisory services to the Company since inception and in connection with this offering in consideration for $65,000 and an aggregate amount of 2,025,000 unregistered shares of Class A Common Stock (representing 3% of the outstanding shares common stock pre-offering).

Magri's opinion letter stated that "we have assumed and not verified . . . the accuracy as to the factual matters of each document we have reviewed." The letter opined "that the [*20]  offer and sale of the [Consulting] Shares by [Altahawi] in the manner contemplated . . . does not require registration under the Securities Act." After Altahawi forwarded the letter to Colonial Transfer, and Meenavalli sent an email to Colonial Transfer "confirming" that Altahawi acquired the Consulting Shares on February 1, 2017, it removed the restrictive legend13Link to the text of the note on the shares. On March 14, 2018, six months to the day after Altahawi was issued the shares, which was September 14, 2017, Altahawi began selling the Consulting Shares.
By March 23, 2018, Altahawi had sold 475,751 shares of Longfin over the NASDAQ and received $25.5 million in proceeds from the sales. This represents nearly 5 times the amount Longfin had raised through the DPO Altahawi was hired to conduct. At times, Altahawi held over 60% of the publicly trading shares of Longfin.



Longfin's Stock Price Collapses and Trading is Halted.
In late March and early April 2018, Longfin's price fell to under $10/share, before climbing back up to approximately $28/share. NASDAQ then suspended trading in the stock. On April 2, 2018, Longfin filed a 10-K report, the first time it had filed either a 10-Q or a 10-K. In the 10-K report, [*21]  Longfin represented that it was delinquent in its reporting obligations under the securities laws of the United States.



III. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The complaint in this action, filed on April 4, 2018, asserts that defendants Longfin, Meenavalli, Altahawi, Penumarthi, and Tammineedi sold securities of Longfin in violation of the registration requirements of the Securities Act. Pending the resolution of this case on the merits, the SEC seeks a preliminary injunction to continue to freeze assets arising out defendants Altahawi, Tammineedi, and Penumarthi's unregistered sales of securities in Longfin.

On April 4, 2018, a judge of this Court issued a temporary restraining order (the "TRO") which, inter alia, froze certain accounts associated with these three defendants containing the proceeds of their sales of Longfin securities. The TRO also set out an expedited discovery schedule and briefing schedule on the motion for preliminary injunction. By its own terms, the TRO provided that it would remain in effect pending the adjudication of the SEC's motion for a preliminary injunction.

The TRO has been extended with respect to defendants Altahawi, Tammineedi, and Penumarthi. The TRO was vacated as [*22]  to defendants Longfin and Meenavalli after the SEC determined that neither had assets subject to the freeze order.

All parties have appeared, and both sides have submitted briefs and declarations in support of their positions. The Court held oral argument on the preliminary injunction motion on April 20, and a conference on April 30.



IV. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
The SEC has sought a preliminary injunction in the form of an asset freeze. To obtain an extension of the asset freeze pending trial, the SEC must show a likelihood of success at trial on the merits of its claims. S.E.C. v. Cavanagh, 155 F.3d 129, 132 (2d Cir. 1998) ("Cavanagh II"). Because an asset freeze will preserve the status quo and is less burdensome than the issuance of an order restraining future conduct, for instance, the SEC need not prove the remaining elements of the ordinary test for issuance of a preliminary injunction. S.E.C. v. Unifund SAL, 910 F.2d 1028, 1039 (2d Cir. 1990).

The SEC's case is brought under Section 5 of the Securities Act, ch. 38, 48 Stat. 74 (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §§ 77a-77aa (2012)). Section 5 of the Securities Act provides, in pertinent part:

Unless a registration statement is in effect as to a security, it shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly--

(1) to make use of any means or instruments of transportation or communication [*23]  in interstate commerce or of the mails to sell such security through the use or medium of any prospectus or otherwise; or

(2) to carry or cause to be carried through the mails or in interstate commerce, by any means or instruments of transportation, any such security for the purpose of sale or for delivery after sale.

15 U.S.C. § 77e(a) (emphasis supplied).
The SEC must satisfy three elements to prove a prima facie case of a violation of Section 5: "first, that no registration statement was in effect as to the securities; second, that the defendant sold or offered to sell these securities; third, that there was a use of interstate transportation, or communication, or of the mails in connection with the sale or offer of sale." S.E.C. v. Cavanagh, 1 F. Supp. 2d 337, 361 (S.D.N.Y.) ("Cavanagh I"), aff'd, 155 F.3d 129 (2d Cir. 1998).

If a prima facie violation of Section 5 has been shown, the burden shifts to the defendant to show their entitlement to an exemption from Section 5. S.E.C. v. Cavanagh, 445 F.3d 105, 111 n.13 (2d Cir. 2006) ("Cavanagh III"). Among the exemptions from the registration requirement is an exemption found in Section 4(a)(1)14Link to the text of the note of the Securities Act, which exempts "transactions by any person other than an issuer, underwriter, or dealer." 15 U.S.C. § 77d(a)(1). As relevant here, an underwriter is defined as

any person who has purchased from an issuer with a view to, or offers or sells [*24]  for an issuer in connection with, the distribution of any security, or participates or has a direct or indirect participation in any such undertaking, or participates or has a participation in the direct or indirect underwriting of any such undertaking.

Id. § 77b(a)(11). For the purpose of the definition of an underwriter, an "issuer" is additionally defined to include "any person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by the issuer, or any person under direct or indirect common control with the issuer."15Link to the text of the note Id. Thus, a transaction is exempt from Section 5's requirements if it is a trade by an ordinary investor rather than by an issuer, underwriter, or dealer. See Cavanagh I, 1 F. Supp. 2d at 361.
In connection with the status of underwriter, the SEC has provided a safe harbor. If a seller of securities demonstrates compliance with SEC Rule 144, then that seller is not deemed an underwriter with respect to those securities. See 17 C.F.R. § 230.144. Specifically, Rule 144 provides that, if certain conditions are met, "any person . . . who sells . . . securities of the issuer . . . shall be deemed not to be an underwriter of those securities within the meaning of section 2(a)(11) of the [Securities] Act." Id. Thus, a demonstration of compliance with Rule 144 conclusively establishes that [*25]  a person is not an underwriter for purposes of Section 4(a)(1), and therefore, if not an issuer or a dealer, permits a person to claim an exemption from Section 5.

Under Rule 144, shares acquired directly from an issuer not involving any public offering are "restricted" securities. Restricted securities may nonetheless be sold under Rule 144's safe harbor if the seller complies with its conditions. Rule 144, as described below, also implicitly creates a second category of securities known as "control" securities, for securities held by "affiliates" of the issuer. These securities are not necessarily "restricted" securities, but nonetheless are subject to limitations on their resale.

Rule 144 is not the exclusive method by which a person can demonstrate entitlement to a Section 4(a)(1) exemption. S.E.C. v. Kern, 425 F.3d 143, 148 (2d Cir. 2005). But, a person claiming an entitlement to a Section 4(a)(1) exemption outside the contours of Rule 144 faces a "substantial burden of proof." Cavanagh III, 445 F.3d at 114 (citation omitted).

A second exemption to Section 5's prohibitions at issue here is the Regulation A+ exemption, codified at Section 3(b) of the Securities Act. As explained at the beginning of this Opinion, the SEC was directed to create an exemption to Section 5's registration requirement for public offerings of securities under $50 million. JOBS Act, 126 Stat at 324 (codified at 15 U.S.C. § 77c(b)(2)). Regulation [*26]  A+, promulgated under the JOBS Act, provides that "[a] public offer or sale of eligible securities . . . pursuant to Regulation A shall be exempt under section 3(b) from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933." 17 C.F.R. § 230.501. It further provides that any securities acquired in a Regulation A+ offering "shall not be restricted securities within the meaning of the Federal securities laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder." 15 U.S.C. § 77c(b)(2)(C). There are numerous requirements for compliance with Regulation A+. 17 C.F.R. § 230.501 et seq. If those requirements are met, shares sold in a Regulation A+ offeringare not generally subject to resale restrictions under federal law.16Link to the text of the note 1 Hazen, Law of Securities Regulation § 4:43 (Oct. 2017). Even if those requirements are met, however, resale may remain restricted if the securities are deemed "control" securities under the terms of Rule 144.

If a violation of Section 5 is found, and there is no exemption available, the SEC's available remedies include disgorgement. Cavanagh III, 445 F.3d at 116-20 (2d Cir. 2006). Disgorgement in securities cases generally reaches the profits of a Section 5 violation. See S.E.C. v. First Jersey Sec., 101 F.3d 1450, 1474-75 (2d Cir. 1996); Unifund SAL, 910 F.2d at 1041-42.



A. Section 5 Violation
The SEC has carried its burden of showing a likelihood of success of proving at trial that the three defendants violated Section 5 in selling their shares. [*27]  There are four sets of shares at issue here. Altahawi acquired and sold the Consulting Shares and the Private Transaction Shares. Tammineedi and Penumarthi acquired and sold December 6 Shares. And Tammineedi acquired and sold the Source Media shares. With respect to each of these four sets of shares, the SEC has shown that it is likely to succeed on the merits of its claim that the sales of these shares were unregistered transactions in violation of Section 5.

There was no Securities Act registration in place for any Longfin shares.17Link to the text of the note It is undisputed that the four sets of shares were sold; indeed, it is the proceeds of those sales that have been frozen. It is also not disputed that the instrumentalities of interstate commerce were used in connection with the transactions at issue here. Accordingly, with one exception, the burden shifts to each of the defendants to prove an exemption from Section 5's requirements.18Link to the text of the note



B. Altahawi's Consulting Shares
Altahawi relies on two exemptions to defend his sales of the Consulting Shares and win recovery of his frozen assets. In each instance, Altahawi contends that he has met his burden to show that he was not an underwriter in [*28]  connection with the sales of the Consulting Shares. First, Altahawi relies on the Rule 144 safe harbor, and alternatively, he relies on Section 4(a)(1) itself. The analysis for each of these exemptions differs depending on whether Altahawi was a Longfin affiliate at the time he acquired the Consulting Shares or for a relevant period of time thereafter. Accordingly, this Opinion will first address his status as an affiliate. Then it will turn to the Rule 144 exemption, followed by the Section 4(a)(1) analysis.



1. Altahawi's Status as an Affiliate
Altahawi was an affiliate of Longfin throughout the time relevant to his sales of the Consulting Shares in March 2018.19Link to the text of the note Under Rule 144, an affiliate is a "person that directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, controls, or is controlled by, or is under common control with, such issuer." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(a)(1).

While Rule 144 fails to define "control," Rule 405 of Regulation C establishes a definition of "affiliate" identical to that of Rule 144 and defines "control" as "the possession, direct or indirect, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise."

Kern, 425 F.3d at 149; see also Rothstein v. Am. Int'l Grp., Inc., 837 F.3d 195, 206 (2d Cir. 2016) (dicta). The "determination [of control] is [*29]  a question of fact which depends upon the totality of the circumstances including an appraisal of the influence upon management and policies of a corporation by the person involved." United States v. Corr, 543 F.2d 1042, 1050 (2d Cir. 1976). "Control may rest with a group of persons, such as the members of the corporation's management (both directors and officers) and their families . . . or a number of business associates." Fundamentals of Securities Regulation at 620. In this context, the test for control is sometimes framed as "a question of fact in each case whether that person has enough influence within the group to be able to obtain the issuer's signature on a registration statement." Id. at 620-21. Under Rule 144, a person qualifies as an "affiliate" if they were a control person within 90 days of the date of their sale of shares. 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(a).
Altahawi was a Longfin affiliate through at least March 2018. Altahawi designed and managed the DPO for Longfin, creating a public market for Longfin's shares that had never existed before, and then dominated that market.

Altahawi was Longfin's secretary until, at the very least, September 2017. As secretary he signed the resolutions adopting Longfin's corporate bylaws, and transferred 3% of its shares to himself. He marketed the DPO on his website, ipoflow.com, and [*30]  represented Longfin in its critical discussions in December 2017 with the NASDAQ exchange to get Longfin registered on that exchange. Altahawi managed the unusual distributions of Longfin shares on December 6, 2017, only to acquire a substantial portion of those shares for himself in even more unusual circumstances less than a month later for below market value. Altahawi communicated with the SEC staff in late December through early February 2018 on behalf of Longfin, seeking guidance on matters such as increasing the size of Longfin's offering and Longfin's Form 8-A, and gave instructions to Colonial Transfer on behalf of Longfin in December 2017. Finally, in March 2018, once he arranged for the removal of the restrictive legend from his shares, Altahawi dominated the public marketplace for shares of Longfin. He controlled approximately 60% of the public "float." Keeping in mind the remedial purpose of the Securities Act, see In re Lehman Bros. Mortgage-Backed Securities Litigation, 650 F.3d 167, 180 (2d Cir. 2011), and Altahawi's influence on and domination of the market for Longfin shares, the evidence at trial will likely establish that Altahawi was an affiliate of Longfin at the time of his sales of the Consulting Shares in March of 2018, and certainly within 90 days [*31]  of those sales.

Altahawi contends principally that he was not an affiliate within 90 days of March 14, 2018, because he was not an officer, director, or 10% shareholder of Longfin within the 90 days period prior to March 14, 2018. These three attributes are hallmarks of an affiliate status. See Securities Act Release No. 7391, Revision of Rule 144, Rule 145, and Form 144, 1997 WL 70601 at *4-5 (Feb. 20, 1997) ("Many practitioners . . . use [these] criteria as a guide."). Assuming each of those assertions is so, his personal management of the entire DPO process and his control of the public float in Longfin shares gave him an equivalent degree of control to qualify as an affiliate. The affiliate test is fact-specific, and in these circumstances, Altahawi is likely to be found an affiliate.



2. Rule 144's Requirements for Selling Restricted and Control Shares
Rule 144 provides two distinct sets of requirements for selling "restricted" or "control" shares. Each of these categories also has different requirements, depending on whether the seller is an affiliate or a non-affiliate. Application of the requirements for the sale of restricted stock will be sufficient to analyze Altahawi's sale of his Consulting Shares; the requirements for the sale of control shares [*32]  impacts the analysis of Altahawi's sale of the Private Transaction Shares.

Pursuant to Rule 144, restricted securities include "[s]ecurities acquired directly or indirectly from the issuer, or from an affiliate of the issuer, in a transaction or chain of transactions not involving any public offering." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(a)(3). Control securities, by contrast, arise from the definition of an affiliate in Rule 144. Rule 144(b)(2) provides that:

Any affiliate of the issuer, or any person who was an affiliate at any time during the 90 days immediately before the sale, who sells restricted securities, or any person who sells restricted or any other securities for the account of an affiliate of the issuer of such securities, or any person who sells restricted or any other securities for the account of a person who was an affiliate at any time during the 90 days immediately before the sale, shall be deemed not to be an underwriter of those securities within the meaning of section 2(a)(11) of the Act if all of the conditions of this section are met.

17 C.F.R. § 230.144(b)(2) (emphasis supplied).
Thus, Rule 144 provides limitations on the sale of two classes of securities held by affiliates (and those who were affiliates within the 90 days before their sale of securities): an affiliate's sale of [*33]  restricted securities, and the affiliate's sale of "any other securities" that are sold for them. These "any other securities" are generally referred to as "control" securities. See Securities and Exchange Commission, Rule 144: Selling Restricted and Control Securities, https://www-sec-gov.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/reportspubs/investor-publications/investorpubsrule144htm.html (Jan. 16, 2013).

Rule 144 sets out five general conditions for affiliates to sell restricted or control securities: the filing of current public information by the issuer (Rule 144(c)), a holding period for the seller, but only for restricted securities (Rule 144(d)), a limitation on the amount of securities sold (Rule 144(e)), requirements on the manner of sale (Rule 144(f) and (g)), and notice to the SEC (Rule 144(h)). 17 C.F.R. § 230.144. If the applicable conditions are met, an affiliate can sell both restricted and control securities and "shall be deemed not to be an underwriter of those securities." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(b)(2).

For a non-affiliate, Rule 144 imposes two limitations on the sale of restricted stock that are of importance here: a reporting requirement for the issuer and a holding period for the seller. Rule 144 provides that, for a company that is a reporting company under the Exchange Act and has been a reporting company for the 90 days immediately before [*34]  the sale of shares at issue, the person "who sells restricted securities of the issuer for his or her own account shall be deemed not to be an underwriter . . . if the conditions of [current public information] and [the holding period] are met." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(b)(1)(i).

The sale of restricted stock by a non-affiliate does not run afoul of the law, however, if the stock has been held for one year. The rule provides that the current public information requirement

shall not apply to restricted securities sold for the account of a person who is not an affiliate of the issuer at the time of the sale and has not been an affiliate during the preceding three months, provided a period of one year has elapsed since the later of the date the securities were acquired from the issuer or from an affiliate of the issuer.

Id. 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(b)(1)(ii).
The holding period, however, can be as short as six months for both an affiliate and a non-affiliate if the issuer is a reporting company. Rule 144(d) provides that

if the issuer of the securities is, and has been for a period of at least 90 days immediately before the sale, subject to the reporting requirements . . . of the Exchange Act, a minimum of six months must elapse between the later of the date of the acquisition [*35]  of the securities from the issuer, or from an affiliate of the issuer, and any resale of such securities.

17 C.F.R. § 230.144(d).
Thus, the length of seller's holding period depends on whether the issuer is a reporting company. If it is a reporting company for the previous 90 days, then the holding period is six months. Otherwise, it is one year. In either case the holding period begins to run from the payment of full consideration. Rule 144(d) provides that "if an acquirer takes the securities by purchase, the holding period shall not begin until the full purchase price or other consideration is paid or given by the person acquiring the securities from the issuer." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(d)(1)(iii).



3. Longfin's Reporting Requirement
Where a company has registered its shares under the Exchange Act, such as those that have registered their shares under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act (as did Longfin on November 22, 2017), and when it has been a reporting company for 90 days, it must file all required Exchange Act reports to be in compliance with Rule 144(c). The "current public information" requirement under Rule 144(c) provides as follows:

(c)Current public information. Adequate current public information with respect to the issuer of the securities must be available. Such information [*36]  will be deemed to be available only if the applicable condition set forth in this paragraph is met:

(1)Reporting issuers. The issuer is, and has been for a period of at least 90 days immediately before the sale, subject to the reporting requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act and has:

(i) Filed all required reports under section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, as applicable, during the 12 months preceding such sale (or for such shorter period that the issuer was required to file such reports), other than Form 8-K reports (§ 249.308 of this chapter);

. . .
(2)Non-reporting issuers. If the issuer is not subject to the reporting requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, there is publicly available the information concerning the issuer specified in paragraphs (a)(5)(i) to (xiv), inclusive, and paragraph (a)(5)(xvi) of § 240.15c2-11 of this chapter, or, if the issuer is an insurance company, the information specified in section 12(g)(2)(G)(i) of the Exchange Act (15 U.S.C. 78l(g)(2)(G)(i)).

17 C.F.R. § 230.144(c) (emphasis supplied).
When Longfin submitted its Form 8-A on November 22, 2017, and that form became effective on November 24, it registered its shares pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act. By March 14, 2018, the first day the Consulting Shares were sold, Longfin had been a reporting company for the immediately preceding 90 days. Accordingly, [*37]  the applicable current public information requirement of Rule 144 required that Longfin be up-to-date on its obligations to file periodic reports with the SEC.

One of those obligations is provided by Rule 13a-13, codified at 17 C.F.R. § 240.13a-13. The rule provides that:

Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, every issuer that has securities registered pursuant to section 12 of the Act and is required to file annual reports pursuant to section 13 of the Act, and has filed or intends to file such reports on Form 10-K [], shall file a quarterly report on Form 10-Q [] within the period specified in General Instruction A.1. to that form for each of the first three quarters of each fiscal year of the issuer, commencing with the first fiscal quarter following the most recent fiscal year for which full financial statements were included in the registration statement, or, if the registration statement included financial statements for an interim period subsequent to the most recent fiscal year end meeting the requirements of Article 10 of Regulation S-X and Rule 8-03 of Regulation S-X for smaller reporting companies, for the first fiscal quarter subsequent to the quarter reported upon in the registration statement. The first quarterly report of the issuer [*38]  shall be filed either within 45 days after the effective date of the registration statement or on or before the date on which such report would have been required to be filed if the issuer has been required to file reports on Form 10-Q as of its last fiscal quarter, whichever is later.

17 C.F.R. § 240.13a-13(a) (emphasis supplied). Therefore, after a company registers its securities, it generally has 45 days to file a 10-Q.
Rule 13a-13 unambiguously required Longfin to file a 10-Q within 45 days after it registered its securities under Section 12(b) on the Exchange Act on November 24, 2017. Thus, Longfin had a duty to file a 10-Q by January 8, 2018, which it did not do.20Link to the text of the note

Indeed, Longfin had a duty to file 10-Qs for each of its first three quarters within 45 days after its Exchange Act registration, which it also did not do. Although the regulation does not precisely address a situation where the issuer does not have at least one full fiscal year of financial statements included in the registration statement, the natural reading of the regulation is that the issuer is required to update its financial information for each quarter since the inception of the company. The only time Longfin provided the market with its financial statements [*39]  was with its offering statements and circulars, which included financial information for the month of February 2017.

Even if the regulation were ambiguous on this point, the SEC has provided persuasive guidance leading to the same conclusion. The SEC has interpreted Rule 13a-13 in the context of Regulation A+ both in guidance documents and in its submission to this Court. A "court must defer to an agency's 'interpretation of its own regulations unless that interpretation is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation.'" S.E.C. v. Alpine Sec. Corp., No. 17cv4179(DLC), ___ F. Supp. 3d ___, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 55446, 2018 WL 1633818, at *8-9 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 30, 2018) (quoting Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 808 F.3d 556, 569 (2d Cir. 2015)). "This is true even if the agency's interpretation of its regulation was not promulgated through formal procedures prescribed by the APA, but, for example, is advanced in a legal brief." Id. (citing Talk Am., Inc. v. Mich. Bell. Tel. Co., 564 U.S. 50, 59, 131 S. Ct. 2254, 180 L. Ed. 2d 96 (2011)). If the regulation is unambiguous, however, "the clear meaning of the regulation controls and may not be overridden by an inconsistent agency interpretation." Id.

In Question 182.23, as part of its Compliance and Disclosure Interpretations, the SEC posed the question:

An issuer registers a class of securities pursuant to the Exchange Act on a Form 8-A concurrently with (i.e., within 5 days after) the qualification of a Form [*40]  1-A (Offering Statement). The issuer's qualified Form 1-A did not contain financial statements for one or more quarterly periods that followed the most recent annual or semiannual period for which financial statements were included in the Form 1-A and that were completed prior to effectiveness of the Form 8-A. When is the issuer required to file quarterly reports for these quarterly periods?

Securities and Exchange Commission, Compliance and Disclosure Interpretations: Securities Act Rules, https://www-sec-gov.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/divisions/corpfin/guidance/securitiesactrules-interps.htm. (Nov. 6, 2017). It answered:
Exchange Act Rule 13a-13 requires the issuer to file a quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the first fiscal quarter following the most recent annual or interim period for which financial statements were included in the registration statement. This report must be filed within 45 days of the effective date of the registration statement or on or by the required due date of the Form 10-Q (as if the issuer already had been required to file Forms 10-Q), whichever is later. Where the issuer's qualified Form 1-A did not contain financial statements for one or more quarterly periods that followed the most recent [*41]  annual or semiannual period for which financial statements were included in the Form 1-A and that were completed prior to effectiveness of the Form 8-A, the staff would not object if the issuer files a Form 10-Q for the completed quarterly period, or two Forms 10-Q if financial statements for more than one quarterly period were not included in the Form 1-A, within 45 days after effectiveness of the Form 8-A.

For example, a calendar year-end issuer registers a class of securities pursuant to the Exchange Act on August 10, 2018, concurrent with the qualification of a Form 1-A that includes financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, but no financial statements for the two most recently completed quarterly periods in 2018. The staff would not object if that issuer files its Forms 10-Q for the first and second fiscal quarters of 2018 on or before September 24, 2018. Unlike the Regulation A issuer, a calendar year-end issuer that registers a class of securities pursuant to the Exchange Act on August 10, 2018, concurrent with the effectiveness of a Form S-1, would have been required to include financial statements for the first fiscal quarter of 2018 in its registration [*42]  statement and would be required to file its Form 10-Q for its second fiscal quarter on or before September 24, 2018.

Id. (emphasis supplied).
This guidance is an entirely reasonable interpretation of Rule 13a-13. The SEC's interpretation in Question 182.23 is also consistent with the position it advances before this Court. Accordingly, to the extent there is any ambiguity in Rule 13a-13, this Court defers to the SEC's interpretation of its own regulation.



4. Application to Consulting Shares
Altahawi's Consulting Shares were restricted shares under the terms of Rule 144(a). They were acquired directly from Longfin, and outside any public offering.21Link to the text of the note As restricted securities, they could not be sold unless Longfin was in compliance with its "current public information" reporting requirements. It is undisputed that Longfin did not file the necessary Exchange Act reports, including its 10-Q within 45 days of the November 24 registration of its shares under the Exchange Act. Indeed, Longfin did not begin to comply with its Exchange Act reporting requirements until it filed a 10-K report on April 2, 2018. Because the SEC has shown that Longfin did not file the required reports, it is unnecessary to address the other requirements [*43]  for selling restricted shares that apply to the sale of the Consulting Shares.

Altahawi's arguments for why Longfin was in compliance with its reporting obligations are without merit. First, Altahawi contends that financial statements need not be included in a registration statement for a Regulation A+ offering. But, Rule 13a-13 does not tie its filing requirements to any requirement or lack of a requirement that financial data be included in the registration statement. Rule 13a-13 provides that, to the extent financial statements are not included in the registration statement, the company must report updated financial information on a quarterly basis.

Second, Altahawi claims that he had conversations with an SEC attorney in January and February 2018 in which he was advised that Longfin was in compliance with its reporting obligations22Link to the text of the note and was never advised that Longfin was out of compliance with those obligations. The SEC also apparently issued a comment letter to Longfin dated February 27, 2018,23Link to the text of the note in which the SEC did not mention that Longfin was out of compliance with its periodic reporting obligations.

Altahawi's argument is essentially one for equitable estoppel. But, "estoppel cannot be asserted against [*44]  the Government 'on the basis of . . . oral advice.'" S.E.C. v. KPMG LLP, No. 03cv671(DLC), 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14301, 2003 WL 21976733, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 20, 2003) (quoting Heckler v. Cmty. Health Servs. of Crawford Cty., Inc., 467 U.S. 51, 104 S. Ct. 2218, 81 L. Ed. 2d 42 (1984)). Nor does a failure to raise a violation in a comment letter bar the SEC from asserting a violation now. See Rojas-Reyes v. I.N.S., 235 F.3d 115, 126 (2d Cir. 2000).

In sum, Altahawi sold restricted shares when Longfin was not in compliance with the current public information requirement. It is also undisputed that Altahawi did not file the required notice to the SEC for an affiliate's sale of shares pursuant to Rule 144(h).24Link to the text of the note Accordingly, the SEC has shown that it is likely to prove that Altahawi did not comply with Rule 144's requirements for an affiliate or a non-affiliate's sale of restricted shares.



5. One-Year Waiting Period
Altahawi makes one additional argument in support of the legality of his sales of the Consulting Shares. As described above, a non-affiliate may sell shares acquired more than one year earlier, even if the issuer is out of compliance with its current public information duties. 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(b). As explained above, it is likely that the trier of fact at trial will conclude that Altahawi was an affiliate of Longfin. But, even if Altahawi were not an affiliate, he did not comply with the one-year holding period before selling his Consulting Shares. Altahawi [*45]  contends he acquired his Longfin shares when he entered into his Agreement with Longfin on February 1, 2017, which is more than one year before he began to sell the Consulting Shares.

A person acquires shares by purchase for the purposes of Rule 144 only when the "full purchase price or other consideration is paid or given by the person acquiring the securities from the issuer." 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(d)(3). A person who works for an issuer in exchange for stock compensation is a purchaser of securities. See generally Yoder v. Orthomolecular Nutrition Inst., Inc., 751 F.2d 555, 558 (2d Cir. 1985); Mills v. Polar Molecular Corp., 12 F.3d 1170, 1175 (2d Cir. 1993) ("Employment contracts promising shares as compensation are generally considered securities transactions.").

Applying the full-purchase-price principle, Altahawi did not acquire the Consulting Shares until June 16, 2017, at the earliest. This conclusion is compelled by the terms of the Agreement itself, as well as by the statements Longfin made to the SEC. Altahawi was retained as a consultant to obtain qualification for Longfin's DPO, among other tasks, which occurred on June 16, 2017.

Altahawi, in support of a February 1, 2017 acquisition date, points to statements made by Meenavalli to Longfin's stock transfer agent on March 6, 2018 to the effect that Altahawi's shares were fully earned by February 1, [*46]  2017. These statements do not override the terms of the Agreement, which in any event was an integrated contract. Meenavalli's statement is also inconsistent with the nature of the transaction. It would make no sense for Longfin to enter into an arrangement whereby Altahawi had fully earned the Consulting Shares on February 1, 2017, even if he chose not to perform any future services for the company. Accordingly, the earliest possible date on which Altahawi could prove that he acquired his shares was June 16, 2017.

Because Altahawi did not acquire the Consulting Shares until, at the very earliest, June 16, 2017, he did not hold the shares at least one year before he sold them in March 2018. Under Rule 144, in order to sell the Consulting Shares as a non-affiliate in less than a year after acquisition, Longfin would have had to be in compliance with its Exchange Act reporting requirements. As discussed above, it was not. The SEC is likely to show, therefore, that Altahawi's sales of the Consulting Shares did not comply with Rule 144 even if he is deemed to be a non-affiliate.



6. Section 4(a)(1) Analysis
Altahawi contends that even if he does not qualify for Rule 144's safe harbor, his sales of the Consulting Shares are exempt [*47]  under Section 4(a)(1) itself. But, as explained above, it is likely that Altahawi will be found at trial to have been an affiliate of Longfin for Rule 144 purposes. If so, he will be deemed an "issuer" for the purpose of the definition of an underwriter under Section 2(a)(11). Kern, 425 F.3d at 152. As an issuer, he would be unable to take advantage of the Section 4(a)(1) exemption outside of the Rule 144 safe harbor. See Cavanagh III, 445 F.3d at 111 & n.12 (citing Cavanagh II, 155 F.3d at 134).

Even if Altahawi were not an affiliate, however, his sales would not be exempt under Section 4(a)(1). Section 4(a)(1) exempts sales from Section 5's prohibition when the sales are from persons other than an issuer, underwriter, or dealer in securities. As already noted, Altahawi has a substantial burden to prove that sales that fall outside Rule 144's safe harbor are nonetheless entitled to an exemption under Section 4(a)(1) of the Securities Act. Cavanagh III, 445 F.3d at 115.

Section 2 of the Securities Act sets forth the definitions of the key terms of the statute. These definitions create three categories of individuals who qualify as underwriters: (1) persons who purchase from an "issuer" with a view to distribution; (2) persons who offer or sell for an "issuer" in connection with the distribution of a security; and (3) persons who participate directly or indirectly in those tasks. See Alameda Cty. Emps.' Ret. Ass'n v. Ebbers (In re WorldCom Sec. Litig.), 308 F. Supp. 2d. 338, 344 (S.D.N.Y. 2004); see generally In re Lehman Bros., 650 F.3d at 176-77 (2d Cir. 2011). The SEC contends Altahawi [*48]  acted as an underwriter in selling his Consulting Shares.25Link to the text of the note

Altahawi has failed to carry his burden to show that has was not a statutory underwriter. In determining whether a person acquired shares with a view to distribution, courts look to objective evidence, such as the length of time the shares were held and whether there has been an unforeseeable change in circumstances of the holder. See S.E.C. v. Boock, No. 09cv8261(DLC), 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 95363, 2011 WL 3792819, at *19 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 25, 2011); see also Kern, 425 F.3d at 153 (collecting cases); Ackerberg v. Johnson, 892 F.2d 1328, 1336 (8th Cir. 1989) ("[T]he courts have considered the more objective criterion of whether the securities have come to rest. That is, the courts look to whether the security holder has held the securities long enough to negate any inference that his intention at the time of acquisition was to distribute them to the public.").

There is abundant evidence that Altahawi always intended to sell the Consulting Shares and not to hold them as an investment. First, there was no effective public market for the Longfin shares until December 2017, when trading began on the NASDAQ. Thus, he had no market for his shares until that date. Altahawi began to sell the Consulting Shares not long thereafter, on a date in March which was six months to the day after he had arranged [*49]  for the shares to be issued to him. Because the Rule 144(d) six-month holding period expired on that day, this strongly indicates that Altahawi intended from the time he received them to distribute his shares rather than invest in them.26Link to the text of the note And, Altahawi's business is apparently to act as a consultant for Regulation A+ offerings, earning his income from that work. He has not asserted that his business is to become a long-term investor in the companies for which he consults. Finally, Altahawi worked in February 2018 to have the restricted designation removed from the Consulting Shares. He hired a lawyer, obtained an opinion letter, and arranged for Meenavalli to confirm to Colonial Transfer that the shares were fully earned as of the date the Agreement was executed, which was February 1, 2017.

Notably, in his declaration, Altahawi never claims that he took the shares of Longfin with an investment purpose. Nor does he attempt to set out any change of circumstance that required a speedier than originally contemplated sale, a circumstance that might entitle him to an exemption under the statute. Although subjective statements of intent, standing alone, would likely not suffice to meet his burden to show [*50]  his intent to acquire for an investment purpose, the absence of any attempt to make that showing confirms that Altahawi will likely be found at trial to be an underwriter under Section 5, even if not found to be an affiliate of Longfin. The proceeds from the sales of the Consulting Shares will therefore remain frozen.



C. Altahawi's Private Transaction Shares
The next tranche of assets the SEC seeks to freeze are assets derived from Altahawi's sale of his Private Transaction Shares. The Private Transaction Shares were among the shares purportedly issued by Longfin to twenty-four individuals on December 6, 2017. Altahawi asserts that he acquired 121,000 of those December 6 Shares from ten individuals on January 12, 2018. He sold them in January and February 2018 over the NASDAQ. Like the Consulting Shares, these shares were not sold pursuant to a Securities Act registration statement, and therefore, the SEC has carried its initial burden of showing a violation of Section 5. Altahawi contends that the shares were purchased pursuant to the Regulation A+ offering, and thus that the shares were not restricted securities.27Link to the text of the note Whether or not Altahawi is found to be an affiliate, Altahawi's sale of these shares likely [*51]  violated the securities laws.

In the first instance, because Altahawi is likely to be deemed an affiliate, even if the shares were originally acquired pursuant to the Regulation A+ offering, when they came into Altahawi's possession they became "control" securities under Rule 144. As such, in order to resell the shares pursuant to Rule 144's safe harbor, among other things, Longfin had to be current in its Exchange Act filings and Altahawi had to provide appropriate notice to the SEC. Neither requirement was met.

Because Altahawi sold at least some of the Private Transaction Shares before 90 days had expired since Longfin became an Exchange Act reporting company on November 22, 2017, the "current public information" requirement under Rule 144 differs somewhat from the analysis just conducted with respect to the Consulting Shares. As described above, the 90-day period called for by Rule 144(c)(1) ended on February 22, 2018.

Rule 144 precludes the sale of control shares in an issuer that is required to file Exchange Act reports until 90 days following registration.28Link to the text of the note Accordingly, as to any sales of the Private Transaction Shares that occurred before February 22, 2018, there was no "current public information." For the sales which took [*52]  place after February 22, 2018, for the reasons described in the discussion of Altahawi's sales of the Consulting Shares, Longfin was delinquent in its reporting obligations. Accordingly, the current public information requirement would not be satisfied as to these sales either.

Even if Altahawi is not found at trial to be an affiliate, however, Altahawi is unlikely to show that the Private Transaction Shares were acquired through a Regulation A+ offering. Accordingly, the Private Transaction Shares would have been restricted shares, for which at least two provisions of Rule 144 were not complied with: the current public information requirement and the holding period, as already described.

Meenavalli claims that each of the ten individuals from whom Altahawi acquired the Private Transaction Shares had themselves purchased their shares from Longfin through its Regulation A+ offering and paid Longfin directly for those shares. But, there is no documentation to show that Longfin received any payment for those shares.29Link to the text of the note Moreover, the notation on the control log reflects that these shares were restricted, suggesting that these shares were not acquired pursuant to the Regulation A+ offering. The circumstantial [*53]  evidence suggests that the December 6 Shares were issued as part of a calculated effort designed by Altahawi to obtain a listing on the NASDAQ and were not bona fide sales by Longfin. As reflected in e-mails, the twenty-four individuals' subscription agreements were packaged together, apparently in connection with providing a shareholder list to the NASDAQ.

Altahawi has also not explained how he managed to purchase these shares from ten separate individuals living in India by obtaining their signatures on the same piece of paper, much less why they agreed to sell the shares at below-market value. Nor has Altahawi provided documentation to confirm he paid even this below-market price for the shares.30Link to the text of the note At bottom, the burden is on Altahawi to produce evidence showing that the ten individuals purchased their shares pursuant to the Regulation A+ offering, which he has failed to do.

Because Altahawi is unlikely to show that the Private Transaction Shares were acquired in the Regulation A+ offering, they were obtained directly from the issuer outside of any public offering, and thereby were restricted shares under Rule 144.31Link to the text of the note When Altahawi acquired the shares from the ten individuals, they remained restricted [*54]  under Rule 144. See 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(a)(3)(i). As restricted shares, Altahawi's sales of the shares needed to comply with the current public information requirement and the applicable holding period. The shares were not held for even six months, and the current public information requirement was not satisfied for the reasons described above. Accordingly, Altahawi is unlikely to establish that his sales of the Private Transaction Shares complied with Rule 144, even if he is a non-affiliate.



D. Tammineedi and Penumarthi
There are two sets of shares at issue with respect to defendants Tammineedi and Penumarthi. Both acquired and sold December 6 Shares, and Tammineedi sold shares purchased through the Source Media account. The SEC has frozen proceeds from the sales of both sets of shares.



1. The December 6 Shares
The SEC has established that it is likely to succeed in showing that Tammineedi and Penumarthi sold unregistered shares in violation of Section 5 of the Securities Act when they sold shares they acquired on December 6, 2017. Again, there was no Securities Act registration filed by Longfin and the other elements of a Section 5 violation are likewise undisputed.

Tammineedi and Penumarthi have not shown that their sales of Longfin shares in December [*55]  2017 and January 2018 were protected by Rule 144's safe harbor, or that they are entitled to an exemption under Section 4(a)(1) of the Securities Act. There is strong evidence that their December 6 Shares were acquired directly from the issuer outside the Regulation A+ offering. There is no documentary evidence that either defendant paid for their December 6 Shares. Their subscription arrangements were apparently driven by the desire to provide the NASDAQ with a shareholder list and thereby meet the NASDAQ's listing requirements. Their shares are in fact marked on the control log as restricted shares.

Tammineedi and Penumarthi's explanations for how they paid for their shares are unlikely to be found credible. Penumarthi claims that he became aware Longfin was contemplating an IPO, and purchased 40,100 shares pursuant to two subscription agreements. He then says that he

paid Longfin Corp. for the shares by transferring from my personal funds borrowed from Adarsh Global Pvt Limited and paid to Stampede Enterprises Limited on August 18, 2017. Stampede confirmed to me that my funds are received by Longfin Corp, Bank on September 1, 2017. I have filled my subscription form and applied on September 2, 2017. And [*56]  received my shares on December 6, 2017.

Penumarthi has not produced any documentation supporting these claims.
Similarly, Tammineedi claims that he purchased his shares with funds transferred to him from Kling Enterprises Limited and that he used those funds to pay Stampede Enterprises Limited in March 2017. He then claims that Stampede was to remit the money on his behalf after the DPO qualification. He also says that Stampede Enterprises Limited confirmed to him that they remitted the funds to Longfin on July 18, 2017. Again, he has produced no documentation to that effect.

Moreover, both of these defendants purchased at least a small number of shares from Longfin in the normal course, with their payments recorded in the Colonial Transfer records, without resort to the roundabout method they purportedly used to acquire the December 6 Shares marked as restricted. Accordingly, it is likely that the trial will establish that both Tammineedi and Penumarthi acquired the shares outside the Regulation A+ offering, and that their shares were restricted shares under Rule 144.

As restricted shares, under Rule 144, Penumarthi and Tammineedi were required to hold the December 6 Shares for a minimum period of one [*57]  year, as described above. Because the December 6 Shares were clearly not held the required one-year period, the sales were not protected by Rule 144.

The SEC also contends that both Tammineedi and Penumarthi are affiliates of Longfin. A finding that they were affiliates would provide additional grounds for freezing the proceeds of their sales of the December 6 Shares. The record for this hearing provides strong support for finding that each of them was an affiliate of Longfin.

Tammineedi is a director of Stampede Capital Limited, a company that Meenavalli founded and that is Longfin's largest shareholder. Stampede Capital Limited owns well over 10% of Longfin's shares, and Meenavalli himself has a substantial interest in Stampede Capital Limited.32Link to the text of the note Tammineedi and Meenavalli are frequent business colleagues and close associates.

Penumarthi acknowledges that he has worked as a consultant for Longfin. He has identified himself as well as a Director of Longfin's UK operations.33Link to the text of the note Penumarthi grew up with Meenavalli and appears to have been a previous business partner of his.

Finally, Penumarthi and Tammineedi do not attempt to demonstrate compliance with Section 4(a)(1) of the Securities Act beyond their claim of compliance [*58]  with Rule 144. Given the minimal length of time between their acquisition of the December 6 Shares and their resale of those shares, they would not be able to establish that the shares were not acquired with a view to distribution. Accordingly, the proceeds of their sales of the December 6 Shares will remain frozen.



2. The Source Media Shares
The SEC is also likely to establish that Tammineedi was ineligible to sell the shares he purchased through his company, Source Media, shortly before the Ziddu.com announcement. The analysis turns on whether Tammineedi was an affiliate of Longfin. It is undisputed that the shares were acquired on the public market by Tammineedi, and sold thereafter. Based on the facts outlined above, the SEC is likely to show that Tammineedi was an affiliate of Longfin at the time he purchased the shares.34Link to the text of the note

Although the Source Media Shares were acquired on the public market, once an affiliate of Longfin acquired them, they became control shares under Rule 144. As control shares, in order to make a sale of these shares legal, Longfin had to have "current public information" filed with the SEC and Tammineedi had to provide notice to the SEC. For the reasons described above, there was [*59]  no current public information filed, and it is undisputed that Tammineedi did not provide the required notice to SEC. And, as an affiliate, Tammineedi is ineligible for the Section 4(a)(1) exemption. Therefore, the proceeds from the sale of the Source Media Shares will remain frozen.



CONCLUSION
The SEC's April 4, 2018 motion for a preliminary injunction is granted with respect to defendants Altahawi, Tammineedi, and Penumarthi. The temporary restraining order, as modified by the April 23 Order, shall continue in effect until further Order of the Court.

SO ORDERED:

Dated: New York, New York

May 1, 2018

/s/ Denise Cote

DENISE COTE

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The parties have agreed that the declarations and documents submitted in support of and in opposition to the preliminary injunction motion shall provide the evidentiary record on which

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Prior to the amendments, Regulation A exempted offerings of certain securities, but the maximum amount that could be raised was much lower. See 1 Louis Loss, Joel Seligman, & Troy Paredes, Fundamentals of Securities Regulation 536 (6th ed. 2011) ("Fundamentals of Securities Regulation").

3Link to the location of the note in the document
A Tier 1 offering generally must also be approved by state securities regulators. Regulation A+ preempts state securities laws for Tier 2 offerings. See generally Lindeen v. S.E.C., 825 F.3d 646, 652, 423 U.S. App. D.C. 155 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (citing 17 C.F.R. § 230.256).

4Link to the location of the note in the document
The relevant statute provides that "[e]very issuer of a security registered pursuant [Section 12 of the Exchange Act] shall file with the [SEC], in accordance with such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe . . . such information and documents . . . as the [SEC] shall require." 15 U.S.C. § 78m; see 17 C.F.R. § 240.13a-1 et seq.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
The parties agree that Altahawi and his company Adamson Brothers are one and the same for the purpose of this motion.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
A Direct Public Offering ("DPO") is similar to an IPO but in a DPO a company generally does not have a firm underwriting commitment to fully sell out the offering.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
The reference to the share swap is a reference to an acquisition of a Singaporean company described below.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
Longfin's April 2, 2018 Form 10-K later reported that Stampede Capital Limited, in turn, was 17.11% controlled by Meenavalli and his wife.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
In opposition to this motion Altahawi misdescribes the resignation letter as a document indicating that he resigned as of September 30. The resignation letter explicitly states that the resignation is effective as of "September 1st," not September 30.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
The control log shows that on September 1, 2017, 36 shareholders were issued shares for a total of 31,775 shares, or less than 1,000 shares apiece on average. Between October 16 and December 6, 2017, 225 purchasers bought a total of 35,950 shares, which is an average of less than 200 shares each.

11Link to the location of the note in the document
See NASDAQ, Initial Listing Guide 10, https://listingcenter.nasdaq.com/assets/initialguide.pdf (December 2017).

12Link to the location of the note in the document
As noted above, Meenavalli and his wife own 17.11% of Stampede Capital Limited.

13Link to the location of the note in the document
Securities subject to holding periods under Rule 144 are generally marked with legends denoting them as "restricted" or "control" securities, to prevent them from being sold until the relevant holding period has passed.

14Link to the location of the note in the document
As part of the JOBS Act, the prior Section 4(1) of the Securities Act was renumbered to Section 4(a)(1). See JOBS Act, 126 Stat. at 314. The substance of the provision was not modified.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
An issuer is defined, with certain exceptions not applicable here, as "every person who issues or proposes to issue any security." 15 U.S.C. § 77b(4).

16Link to the location of the note in the document
State law Blue Sky provisions, however, may still apply to resale of some Regulation A+ shares. See Regulation A+ SEC Release, 80 Fed. Reg. at 21,859-63.

17Link to the location of the note in the document
The November 22, 2017 registration statement was pursuant to the Exchange Act, not the Securities Act. The requirements for registration under each statute differ, and registration under one does not suffice under the other. See 1 Fundamentals of Securities Regulation 625-26.

18Link to the location of the note in the document
This Opinion assumes without deciding that the SEC bears the burden of showing that Tammineedi was an affiliate of Longfin at the time Source Media acquired Longfin shares over the NASDAQ.

19Link to the location of the note in the document
Because the burden of proving entitlement to an exemption falls on Altahawi, he bears the burden as well of proving he was not an affiliate. The conclusion reached herein, however, would not be altered even if the SEC bore the burden.

20Link to the location of the note in the document
Pursuant to Rule 13a-13, if the market already had information from the immediately preceding fiscal quarter, the 10-Q may be filed later. Longfin did not have such information publicly available.

21Link to the location of the note in the document
Altahawi's Consulting Shares are also likely "control" shares. Since their sale failed to meet the requirements for the sale of restricted shares, however, it is unnecessary to consider this alternate analysis.

22Link to the location of the note in the document
The SEC attorney denies having the conversation as Altahawi describes it.

23Link to the location of the note in the document
The letter has not been submitted as part of the record on this motion.

24Link to the location of the note in the document
Rule 144(h) generally requires notice to the SEC on SEC Form 144 when an affiliate sells shares. Altahawi has not filed any Form 144 with respect to his sales of the Consulting Shares, or any other sales of Longfin shares.

25Link to the location of the note in the document
The SEC does not contend that Altahawi is a "dealer" or an "issuer" within the meaning of Section 4(a)(1).

26Link to the location of the note in the document
To recap, the six month holding period under Rule 144(d) is available to affiliates and to non-affiliates. But, to take advantage of that shorter holding period (in contrast to a one-year holding period), the issuer must be in compliance with its Exchange Act reporting requirements.

27Link to the location of the note in the document
Altahawi relies on the Rule 144 exemption to protect the proceeds from the sale of the Private Transaction Shares. He does not rely more generally on Section 4(a)(1).

28Link to the location of the note in the document
In any event, because the last publicly available financial information for Longfin was from February 28, 2017, the requirements applicable to non-reporting issuers would not have been satisfied either. 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(c)(2).

29Link to the location of the note in the document
At oral argument, defense counsel proffered a different explanation: that the shares were purchased for the ten individuals through an entity called Stampede Capital. No documentation has been submitted showing that Stampede Capital directly paid Longfin for the shares either.

30Link to the location of the note in the document
Altahawi contends he paid $30 per share, at a time when Longfin was trading at over $40 per share on the NASDAQ.

31Link to the location of the note in the document
In the alternative, the SEC contends that some of the Private Transaction Shares were acquired from affiliates of Longfin, thus making the securities restricted as acquired from an affiliate outside a public offering. 17 C.F.R. § 230.144(a)(3)(i).

32Link to the location of the note in the document
Meenavalli, the CEO of Longfin, owns 17.11% of Stampede Capital Limited with his wife.

33Link to the location of the note in the document
In opposition to this motion, Penumarthi claims his statement was "inaccurate.

34Link to the location of the note in the document
While a defendant who sells shares acquired from an issuer bears the burden to show that those sales are protected by Rule 144 or Section 4(a)(1), this Opinion assumes without deciding that the SEC bears the burden of showing that a defendant who acquires shares on the open market that were issued in a Regulation A+ offering was an affiliate of the issuer at the time of the open market purchase. I. BACKGROUND1Link to the text of the note

A. General Factual Allegations
This case arises from events preceding the collapse of Mt. Gox, one of the world's most prominent bitcoin exchanges. (Compl. ¶ 9.) Bitcoin is a digital cryptocurrency that is used like money. See Investor Alert: Bitcoin and Other Virtual Currency-Related Investments, SEC (May 7, 2014), https://www.investor.gov/additional-resources/news-alerts/alerts-bulletins/investor-alert-bitcoin-other-virtual-currency. It can be exchanged for traditional currencies, such as the U.S. dollar, or used to purchase goods or services. See id. Unlike a traditional, fiat currency, bitcoin is not backed by any government or verified through any bank. See Jeffrey E. Alberts and Bertrand Fry, Is Bitcoin a Security?, 21 B.U. J. Sci. & Tech. L. 1 (2015). Rather, each transaction is "recorded on a decentralized public ledger, called a 'blockchain.'" See id.

From the time of its founding in 2009 until its bankruptcy in 2014, Mt. Gox operated as a global exchange for bitcoin. (Compl. ¶¶ 9, 27.) Mt. Gox users had the ability to buy and sell bitcoin [*3]  "24/7/365 with the world's most sophisticated trading platform," as well as to "securely store [b]itcoin in a virtual 'vault' for safe keeping." (Id. ¶ 9.) In order to use Mt. Gox's services, users had to create an account through its website and agree to the Terms of Service, which expressly warranted that Mt. Gox would "hold all monetary sums and all [b]itcoins deposited by each Member in its Account, in that Member's name as registered in their Account details, and on such Member's behalf." (Id. ¶ 10.) To create an account, users were required to provide detailed information, including their full name, date of birth, country of birth, physical address, and proof of identity. (Id. ¶ 11.) Users could then transfer their previous bitcoins directly into their Mt. Gox account or deposit cash into their account by wiring money to Mt. Gox's Japanese banking partner, Mizuho, and begin making trades. (Id. ¶ 12.)

In mid-2013, Mizuho was the exclusive processor of all bank deposits and withdrawals made by Mt. Gox users located in the United States. (Id. ¶ 21.) In that capacity, Mizuho facilitated international cash wire transfers from Mt. Gox users into the exchange and processed user requests [*4]  to withdraw fiat currency from the exchange to their outside bank accounts. (Id. ¶ 18.) When a user wished to deposit money in their Mt. Gox account, Mizuho would accept the payment that had been wired through the user's outside banks and deposit the funds into Mt. Gox's Mizuho account. (Id. ¶ 19.) Such wire transfers not only designated Mt. Gox as the beneficiary of the wire and Mizuho as the beneficiary's bank, but also included the Mt. Gox user's account number to which the funds were to be directed. (Id.) Likewise, when a user wished to withdraw fiat currency from their Mt. Gox account, Mt. Gox would provide the request to Mizuho for processing. (Id. ¶ 20.) Such requests included the user's banking information and the amount to be transferred. (Id.) Mizuho would then transfer out the requested amount to the user's outside bank. (Id.)

Around this time, Mizuho became increasingly concerned by Mt. Gox's growing transaction volumes amid reports that U.S. authorities were investigating Mt. Gox for business dealings related to money laundering. (Id. ¶ 22.) At the same time, Mizuho faced its own legal troubles in Japan, with reports surfacing that the bank had knowingly loaned money to [*5]  organized crime syndicates and was under investigation by Japan's Financial Services Agency. (Id.) For fear of further regulatory scrutiny and reputational harm, Mizuho decided that it wanted to distance itself from Mt. Gox. (Id. ¶ 23.) Mizuho wanted Mt. Gox to be the one to officially sever the banking relationship, but Karpeles refused. (Id.) Thus, in order to pressure Karpeles into rethinking his decision and force an end to the banking relationship, Mizuho began implementing a series of new policies, including new measures to refuse to process international wire transfer requests. (Id. ¶ 24.) The purpose of these new policies, all of which were kept secret from the public, was to frustrate and disrupt Mt. Gox's business and relationship with its customers. (Id.)

Accordingly, in June 2013, Mt. Gox users began to report substantial difficulties in withdrawing cash from their Mt. Gox accounts. (Id. ¶ 26.) Mizuho allegedly prohibited Mt. Gox from publicly disclosing that the withdrawal difficulties were attributable to Mizuho or that Mizuho wanted to terminate its banking relationship with Mt. Gox. (Id. ¶ 32.) Mizuho never corrected Karpeles' public statements that the delays were temporary [*6]  and due to a "backlog" in Mt. Gox's system. (Id. ¶¶ 30-31.) Instead, Mizuho continued to accept deposits from Mt. Gox users in order to profit from the deposit fees that it collected and to feed into the false narrative that the delays were merely temporary and full service would be restored. (Id. ¶¶ 28, 30, 32.)

On February 7, 2014, Mt. Gox halted all user withdrawal requests of bitcoin, leaving many users unable to withdraw bitcoins or fiat currency from their accounts. (Id. ¶¶ 33-34.) On February 24, 2014, the Mt. Gox website went dark. (Id. ¶ 35.) Users were no longer able to access or view their accounts and a message on the webpage read that a "decision was taken to close all transactions for the time being." (Id. (emphasis in original)) Then, a few days later, on February 28, 2014, Mt. Gox filed for bankruptcy protection in Japan. (Id. ¶ 36.)



B. Factual Allegations Relating to Pearce
Pearce joined Mt. Gox in or around November 2013. (Id. ¶ 42.) After creating his account with Mt. Gox, Pearce transferred his previously purchased bitcoins to his account and began to sell and trade through Mt. Gox. (Id. ¶ 43.) Pearce paid transaction fees to Mt. Gox on every trade, in part, to be [*7]  able to buy, sell, trade, and withdraw bitcoins, and also, in part, to maintain and protect his bitcoins. (Id. ¶ 44.)

In January 2014, Pearce converted some of his bitcoin to fiat currency with the intention of immediately withdrawing $5,900 USD2Link to the text of the note from his Mt. Gox account. (Id. ¶ 45.) On January 29, 2014, Pearce submitted a withdrawal request for $5,900 from his Mt. Gox account, with instructions to deposit the funds in his U.S. bank account. (Id. ¶ 46.) That same day, Pearce received an email from Mt. Gox confirming that the withdrawal request had been received. (Id.) However, Pearce never received his funds and, on February 10, 2014, He received a message from Mt. Gox customer support indicating that all international withdrawals were delayed. (Id. ¶ 47.) Pearce started to become concerned when he began reading negative press about the then-current status of the exchange and, in need of cash to pay his bills, attempted to cancel his fiat currency withdrawal request and move his entire bitcoin balance out of Mt. Gox. (Id. ¶ 48.) He was unable to do so and, shortly thereafter, Mt. Gox went dark. (Id. ¶¶ 48-49.)

At no point prior to or during the transfer of his bitcoins into the Mt. Gox [*8]  exchange did Mt. Gox or Mizuho notify Pearce that Mt. Gox had suffered any type of computer "bug"; that Mizuho was no longer providing withdrawal services to Mt. Gox users; or that either bitcoin or fiat currency funds would be permanently inaccessible. (Id. ¶ 50.) Had Pearce known that Mizuho was interfering with Mt. Gox's ability to service users; that his ability to make cash withdrawals from the exchange would be materially compromised; that the security of Mt. Gox had been compromised; or that Mt. Gox intended to go offline and declare bankruptcy, he would not have opened his account with Mt. Gox or transferred his bitcoins into the exchange, and/or would have taken immediate steps to withdraw his bitcoins from the exchange. (Id. ¶ 51.)



II. LEGAL STANDARD
When a court decides a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(2), it must consider allegations made by plaintiff as true and construe all disputed facts in favor of the plaintiff. See Pinker v. Roche Holdings Ltd., 292 F.3d 361, 368 (3d Cir. 2002); Isaacs v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, Civ. No. 13-5708, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, 2014 WL 4186536, at *5 (E.D. Pa. Aug. 25, 2014). However, the court's analysis is not limited to the pleadings and the court may consider affidavits and "other competent evidence submitted by the parties." Isaacs, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, 2014 WL 4186536, at *5 (citing Patterson by Patterson v. FBI, 893 F.2d 595, 603-04 (3d Cir. 1990)). Since a Rule 12(b)(2) motion is "inherently a matter which requires resolution of factual issues outside [*9]  the pleadings," the plaintiff may not "rely on the bare pleadings alone in order to withstand a . . . motion to dismiss for lack of in personam jurisdiction." Patterson, 893 F.2d at 603-04 (quoting Time Share Vacation Club v. Atlantic Resorts, Ltd., 735 F.2d 61, 67 n.9 (3d Cir. 1984)). Though the plaintiff initially need only allege "sufficient facts to establish a prima facie case of jurisdiction . . . , [o]nce those allegations are contradicted by an opposing affidavit, . . . plaintiff[] must present similar evidence in support . . . ." Isaacs, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, 2014 WL 4186536, at *5 (citing Patterson, 893 F.2d at 603-04; In re Chocolate Confectionary Antitrust Litig., 602 F. Supp. 2d 538, 556 (M.D. Pa. 2009)).



III. DISCUSSION
Mizuho argues (1) that this Court lacks personal jurisdiction to hear the claim brought against it and (2) that Pearce fails to state a claim for tortious interference with contract. Mizuho requests that this Court dismiss Pearce's claim with prejudice.

For the following reasons, we find that this Court, indeed, does not have personal jurisdiction over Mizuho. Accordingly, we decline to consider whether Pearce has properly pleaded a claim of tortious interference against Mizuho.



A. Constitutional Limits of Personal Jurisdiction
To determine whether personal jurisdiction exists, a district court must conduct a two-step analysis. First, the court must look to the forum state's long-arm statute to determine if personal jurisdiction is permitted [*10]  over a defendant. Second, the court must determine whether the exercise of jurisdiction violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See Kabbaj v. Simpson, 547 F. App'x 84, 86 (3d Cir. 2013); IMO Indus., Inc. v. Kiekert AG, 155 F.3d 254, 258-59 (3d Cir. 1998); Vertoex Certainteed Corp. v. Consol. Fiber Glass Prods. Co., 75 F.3d 147, 150 (3d Cir. 1996).

Pennsylvania's long-arm statute permits the exercise of personal jurisdiction to the fullest limits of Fourteenth Amendment. 42 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 5322(b); Vertoex, 75 F.3d at 150. "Personal jurisdiction under the Due Process Clause depends upon 'the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation.'" Kabbaj, 547 F. App'x at 86; IMO Indus. Inc., 155 F.3d at 259 (quoting Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 204, 97 S. Ct. 2569, 53 L. Ed. 2d 683 (1977)). If the plaintiff's claim does not arise from the defendant's contacts with Pennsylvania, this Court could exercise general jurisdiction only if we determine that the defendant has "continuous and systematic" contacts with Pennsylvania. See id. at 86 (citing Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 414, 416, 104 S. Ct. 1868, 80 L. Ed. 2d 404 & n.9 (1984)). However, if the plaintiff's cause of action arose from the defendant's contacts with Pennsylvania, we could exercise specific jurisdiction over the defendant if we find that he or she has sufficient minimum contacts with the forum and if the exercise of jurisdiction would "comport with traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice." See id. at 86-87 (quoting IMO Indus., Inc., 155 F.3d at 259). To determine whether the defendant has minimum contacts with the jurisdiction, we must look to whether the defendant has "purposefully avail[ed] [him]self of the privilege of conducting activities within [the forum]." [*11]  See id. at 87 (first and second alterations in original) (quoting Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475, 105 S. Ct. 2174, 85 L. Ed. 2d 528 (1985)).



B. General Jurisdiction
We initially find that we lack general jurisdiction over Mizuho. It is readily apparent from the pleadings and Mizuho's Motion that Mizuho is a Japanese financial institution that is not "at home" in Pennsylvania nor has any "continuous contacts" with the forum. (Compl. ¶ 5; Def.'s Mem. Law in Supp. Mot. to Dismiss 6; Ex., Declaration of Yasuo Imaizumi.) In a signed declaration submitted in support of Mizuho's Motion, Yasuo Imaizumi, a Deputy General Manager, Legal Division of Mizuho, states that: (1) Mizuho is incorporated and located in Tokyo, Japan; (2) Mizuho has no branch offices or representatives in Pennsylvania; (3) Mt. Gox opened its bank accounts at a Mizuho branch office located in Tokyo, Japan; (4) Mizuho did not open or make any decisions regarding bank accounts belonging to Mt. Gox in Pennsyvania; and (5) Mt. Gox users made withdrawal requests directly to Mt. Gox, not Mizuho, and Mizuho, in accord with its general practice and Japanese banking laws, does not communicate with its customer's customers. (Def.'s Mem. Law in Supp. Mot. to Dismiss Ex., Declaration of Yasuo Imaizumi.)

However, in [*12]  support of general jurisdiction, Pearce raises the tenuous argument that a Mizuho subdivision, Mizuho Securities USA LLC ("Mizuho Securities"), has a branch office in Philadelphia. (Pl.'s Mem. Law in Opp'n 9.)

While it may be true that Mizuho Securities is an agent of Mizuho, Pearce has not alleged how the activities conducted by Mizuho Securities are at all relevant to this case. See World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297, 100 S. Ct. 559, 62 L. Ed. 2d 490 (1980) ("The Due Process Clause . . . gives a degree of predictability to the legal system that allows potential defendants to structure their primary conduct with some minimum assurances as to where that conduct will and will not render them liable to suit.") "It is essential in each case that there be some act by which the defendant purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws." Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253, 78 S. Ct. 1228, 2 L. Ed. 2d 1283 (1958). See Dejames v. Magnificence Carriers, Inc., 654 F.2d 280, 285 (3d Cir. 1981) (citing World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U.S. at 297) (holding derivative benefits may be insufficient to support personal jurisdiction over defendants); see also Helicopteros, 466 U.S. at 413; TriStrata Tech., Inc. v. Neoteric Cosmetics, Inc., 961 F. Supp. 686, 691 (D. Del. 1997) ("While seemingly broad in its language, the standard for general jurisdiction is high in practice and not often met.") Mizuho Securities has placed its securities trading services "into the stream of commerce with the expectation [*13]  that they will be purchased by consumers in [Pennsylvania]," but Mizuho has not done so with its banking services. See World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U.S. at 297. Thus, it does not follow that Mizuho "should have 'reasonably anticipate[d]' being haled into [Pennsylvania] court" for its banking activities. See id. Accordingly, this Court does not have general jurisdiction over Mizuho.



C. Specific Jurisdiction
We also find that this Court does not have specific jurisdiction over Mizuho for two reasons: (1) Pearce has not established a prima facie case for specific jurisdiction over Mizuho and (2) Pearce has not met his burden of proof to overcome Mizuho's motion to dismiss.



1. Alleged Facts Do Not Support a Prima Facie Case of Specific Jurisdiction

a. The Traditional Test
To establish specific jurisdiction, the Court must conduct a three-part inquiry. O'Connor v. Sandy Lane Hotel Co., 496 F.3d 312, 317 (3d Cir. 2007). First, the defendant must have "purposefully directed [its] activities" at the forum. Id. (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 472). Second, the litigation must "arise out of or relate to" at least one of those activities. Id. (quoting Helicopteros, 466 U.S. at 414). And third, a court may consider whether the exercise of jurisdiction otherwise "comport[s] with 'fair play and substantial justice.'" Id. (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 476).

To establish the first prong, [*14]  physical presence within the forum is not required, however, it is necessary that there is a deliberate targeting into the forum by the nonresident defendant. See id. at 317. Thus, the "unilateral activity of those who claim some relationship with a nonresident defendant" is insufficient. See id. In this case, Mizuho asserts that all claim-related activities occurred in and were directed at Japan. (Def.'s Mem. Law in Supp. Mot. to Dismiss 6 ("[T]he Mizuho employees who made the policies and decisions related to Mt. Gox's bank accounts . . . were located in Japan . . . .")) Mizuho argues that the only relationship between Pearce's claim and Pennsylvania is the fact that Pearce resides there. (Id. at 6.) It is well established that a plaintiff's residency alone cannot sustain personal jurisdiction over a defendant. See, e.g., Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 284-85, 134 S. Ct. 1115, 188 L. Ed. 2d 12 (2014) ("[P]laintiff cannot be the only link between the defendant and the forum."); Hanson, 357 U.S. at 253-54 (finding jurisdiction was not predicated on domicile of trust-settlor).

Pearce contends that Mizuho made the decision to interfere with his contract with Mt. Gox precisely because he was located in Pennsylvania. (Pl.'s Mem. Law in Opp'n 7, 8.) However, the alleged act at the heart of Pearce's claim is [*15]  a negative action. By not fulfilling the withdrawal request, Mizuho failed to direct any activity at Pennsylvania.

To illustrate this point, it is helpful to briefly compare the facts of this case to its sister case in the Northern District of Illinois, Greene v. Mizuho Bank. Ltd., 169 F. Supp. 3d 855 (N.D. Ill. 2016).3Link to the text of the note Greene describes, among other things, two similarly situated plaintiffs, Gregory Greene ("Greene"), a resident of Illinois, and Joseph Lack ("Lack"), a resident of California. Id. at 858-59. Both men were Mt. Gox users and brought suit against Mizuho following its collapse. Id. at 858. As in this case, Mizuho moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. Id. at 857. The Northern District of Illinois found that Lack had sent Mizuho a wire transfer from his California bank after Mizuho had ceased fulfilling withdrawal requests and that, by accepting the deposit and profiting from the associated fees, Mizuho was aware that Lack was a California resident and was "purposefully exploit[ing] the [California] market." Id. at 865 (second alteration in original) (quoting Advanced Tactical Ordnance Sys., LLC v. Real Action Paintball, Inc., 751 F.3d 796, 802 (7th Cir. 2014)). However, the court found that Greene had merely traded bitcoin on Mt. Gox and had never sent any wire transfers or paid any transaction fees to Mizuho. Id. at 865. Thus, Greene's argument that Mizuho tortiously interfered [*16]  with his consumer agreement with Mt. Gox by trying to "undermine Mt. Gox's ability to do business," did not establish the necessary transactional contacts with Mizuho. Id.

The facts of Pearce's claim fall somewhere in between those of Lack and Greene. However, the facts in Pearce's claim are more aligned to Greene's because Mizuho never engaged in any transactional contact with Pearce. Therefore, under the facts alleged by Pearce, we do not find that Mizuho created any "relationship among [itself], the forum, and the litigation." See Walden, 571 U.S. at 284-85 (quoting Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc., 465 U.S. 770, 775, 104 S. Ct. 1473, 79 L. Ed. 2d 790 (1984)). Therefore, Pearce cannot establish the first prong of the prima facie case of specific jurisdiction.

As to the second and third prongs, since we have found that no activities were directed at Pennsylvania, it follows that Pearce's claim cannot "arise out of or relate to" such an activity. Therefore, because Pearce fails to establish the first and second prongs, we need not consider the third prong. IMO Indus., 155 F.3d at 259 (declining to analyze "fair play and substantial justice" standard because plaintiff did not meet its burden to show defendant's minimum contacts with forum).



b. The Calder Effects Test
This Court acknowledges that jurisdictional questions are fact-intensive [*17]  decisions. We must make each inquiry on a claim-by-claim basis. See Marten v. Godwin, 499 F.3d 290, 296 (3d Cir. 2007) (citing Remick v. Manfredy, 238 F.3d 248, 255-56 (3d Cir. 2001)). In this case, Pearce alleges a claim of tortious interference with contract against Mizuho. (Compl. ¶¶ 78-84.) Because the claim is an intentional tort, we may conduct the Calder "effects test" to analyze specific jurisdiction. See Marten, 499 F.3d at 296-97 (citing Calder v. Jones, 465 U.S. 783, 104 S. Ct. 1482, 79 L. Ed. 2d 804 (1984)) ("The plaintiff can demonstrate a court's jurisdiction over a defendant even when the defendant's 'contacts with the forum alone . . . are far too small to comport with the requirements of due process' under our traditional analysis.")

To establish personal jurisdiction under Calder, the plaintiff must show that: (1) the defendant committed an intentional tort; (2) the plaintiff felt the brunt of the harm in the forum such that the forum can be said to be the focal point of the harm suffered by the plaintiff as a result of that tort; and (3) the defendant expressly aimed his tortious conduct at the forum such that the forum can be said to be the focal point of the tortious activity. IMO Indus., 155 F.3d at 265-66. The third prong is a threshold issue, thus we will analyze it first. Marten, 499 F.3d 297 ("Only if the 'expressly aimed' element of the effects test is met need we consider the other two elements.")

Initially, [*18]  Pearce asserts in his Memorandum of Law in Opposition that the "harm suffered because of Mizuho's interference (i.e., when Pearce lost all of his deposited funds and bitcoin) was undeniably felt by Pearce in Pennsylvania." (Pl.'s Mem. Law in Opp'n 8.) However, this is inconsistent with the Class Action Complaint for two reasons. First, Pearce never claims that any loss of bitcoins was a result of Mizuho's conduct. (Compl. ¶ 84 ("As a result of Mizuho's conduct, Plaintiff and the Class have suffered damages in the amount of currency they attempted to . . . withdraw from the [Mt. Gox exchange].") (emphasis added).) Second, as discussed above, Pearce never claims that he deposited funds in his Mt. Gox account, through Mizuho or any other bank. (Id. ¶¶ 43-45.) Nonetheless, Pearce does allege that he was unable to withdraw $5,900 because Mizuho did not fulfill his withdraw request. (Id. ¶¶ 46, 84.)

However, we find that Mizuho did not expressly aim its conduct at Pennsylvania. In order to satisfy this element, a plaintiff must show that the "defendant knew that the plaintiff would suffer the brunt of the harm caused by the tortious conduct in the forum, and point to specific activity indicating [*19]  that the defendant expressly aimed its tortious conduct at the forum." Marten, 499 F.3d at 297-98 (citing IMO Indus., 155 F.3d at 266). "If a plaintiff fails to show that the defendant '"manifest[ed] behavior intentionally targeted at and focused on" the forum . . . ,' the plaintiff fails to establish jurisdiction under the effects test." Id. at 298.

It is unclear from the Class Action Complaint whether Mizuho was ever aware of Pearce's withdrawal request. Pearce asserts that he "submitted a withdrawal request [to Mt. Gox] . . . , with instructions to deposit the funds in his U.S. bank account" and that he "received an email from Mt. Gox confirming that the withdrawal request had been received." (Compl. ¶ 46.) Pearce never alleges that Mt. Gox actually sent his request, which would have included details, such as his banking details and address, to Mizuho for processing. Pearce only communicated with Mt. Gox and does not allege any communication took place with Mizuho. (Id. ¶ 47.)

If Mizuho never received Pearce's withdrawal request from Mt. Gox, it would be impossible for it to know that Pearce would suffer harm in Pennsylvania because of Mizuho's policy. Likewise, if Mizuho never received Pearce's withdrawal request, there could be no specific [*20]  activity aimed at Pennsylvania. Therefore, Pearce has not alleged that Mizuho has expressly aimed any conduct at Pennsylvania. Since he cannot meet this prong, Pearce has failed to satisfy the Calder test and we need not analyze the remaining two prongs. Marten, 499 F.3d 297.

For these reasons, Pearce has not established a prima facie case for personal jurisdiction over Mizuho.



2. Pearce Has Not Met His Burden of Proof
Even if Pearce had adequately pleaded a prima facie case for personal jurisdiction, Mizuho has challenged jurisdiction pursuant to Rule 12(b)(2). A Rule 12(b)(2) motion is "inherently a matter which requires resolution of factual issues outside the pleadings, i.e. whether in personam jurisdiction actually lies." Time Share Vacation Club, 735 F.2d at 67, n.9. "It is the burden of the plaintiff to prove that the defendant purposefully availed himself of the forum state. To satisfy this burden, 'at no point may the plaintiff rely on the bare pleadings alone, but rather must sustain its burden 'through sworn affidavits or other competent evidence.'" Isaacs, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, 2014 WL 4186536, at *5 (quoting Patterson, 893 F.2d at 603-04). Here, Pearce has failed to supplement his pleadings with actual proofs.

Therefore, Pearce has not met his burden to survive Mizuho's Motion to Dismiss.



IV. CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing reasons, Mizuho's [*21]  Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction is granted. Accordingly, because we have found that this Court does not have personal jurisdiction over Mizuho, we do not decide Mizuho's Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim.

An appropriate Order follows.



ORDER
AND NOW, this 27th day of August, 2018, upon consideration of Defendant Mizuho Bank, Ltd.'s ("Mizuho") Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim and for Lack of Jurisdiction (Doc. No. 11), Plaintiff Gregory Pearce's Response in Opposition to the Motion to Dismiss, and Mizuho's Reply Memorandum of Law in Further Support, it is hereby ORDERED that Mizuho's Motion to Dismiss is GRANTED for lack of personal jurisdiction under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(2).1Link to the text of the note

It is FUTHER ORDERED that Count III of Plaintiff's Complaint is DISMISSED. The Clerk of Court shall terminate Mizuho from this case.

BY THE COURT:

/s/ Robert F. Kelly

ROBERT F. KELLY

SENIOR JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
We take the facts alleged in the Class Action Complaint as true, as we must when deciding a motion under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(2) and 12(b)(6). See Isaacs v. Dartmouth Coll., Civ. No. 13-5708, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, 2014 WL 4186536, at *5 (E.D. Pa. Aug. 25, 2014) (citing Pinker v. Roche Holdings Ltd., 292 F.3d 361, 368 (3d Cir. 2002)); see also Connelly v. Lane Constr. Corp., 809 F.3d 780, 786 (3d Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).

2Link to the location of the note in the document
All references to monetary amounts are based on U.S. Dollars (USD).

3Link to the location of the note in the document
This case is familiar to both parties, as Pearce was, at one time, a named plaintiff in the case and the law firms and lawyers overlap considerably.

1Link to the location of the note in the document
Since we find that this Court does not have personal jurisdiction over Mizuho, we decline to consider Mizuho's Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6).

  LexisNexis Logo. I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Donte McClellon ("McClellon") alleges that Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. ("Wells Fargo") negligently mismanaged his funds, which prevented him from purchasing 14,829.46 Ethereum.1Link to the text of the note (Dkt. No. 1-2 at 1.) Before filing this action, McClellon submitted his claims to arbitration. (Dkt. No. 11 at 5-7.) In arbitration, McClellon sued Wells Fargo for negligence, breach of contract, and violation of Regulation E and Regulation Z because Wells Fargo failed to prevent a series of fraudulent transactions from McClellon's [*2]  checking accounts. (Id. at 30.) McClellon also alleged that this failure prevented him from purchasing 14,829.46 Ethereum. (Id. at 34, 36.) McClellon requested damages of 14,829.46 Ethereum and $349,000. (Id. at 36.) The arbitrator dismissed McClellon's claim with prejudice because he could not prove damages. (Id. at 6.) The arbitrator also found that "some, if not all" of McClellon's evidence was fraudulent. (Id.)

Before the arbitrator issued a final judgment, McClellon sued Wells Fargo in King County Superior Court. (Dkt. No. 1-2.) In his complaint, McClellon makes the following allegations against Wells Fargo:

This is an action under the Uniform Commercial Code (4.22.005 to 925) and Washington Consumer Protection Act, RCW 19.86.020, based upon Defendant's blatant self-dealing and other intentional negligent misconduct in conversion, freezing, pooling, otherwise manipulating Plaintiff's funds without Plaintiff's authorization.

Plaintiff further allege that the Defendant violated the Washington State Securities Act, Regulation E and committed the tort of negligence in handling of Plaintiff's funds. The Plaintiff seeks compensatory damages and all other damages (i.e., direct and consequential damages) allowed by law, and payment of costs [*3]  and attorneys' fees.

(Id. at 1.) McClellon also alleged that Wells Fargo's action prevented him from purchasing 14,829.46 Ethereum. (Id. at 3). On June 12, 2018, Wells Fargo removed the case to this Court. (Dkt. No. 1 at 2.) Wells Fargo moved to dismiss based on res judicata, asserting that the claims were already resolved in arbitration. (Dkt. No. 10 at 1.) In response, McClellon filed a motion to remand (Dkt. No. 17).


II. DISCUSSION

A. McClellon's Motion to Remand

1. Legal Standard
A party to a civil action brought in state court may remove that action to federal court if the district court would have had original jurisdiction at the time of both commencement of the action and removal. See 28 U.S.C. § 1441(a); 14B Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 3723 (4th ed. 2013). Once removed, the case can be remanded to state court for either lack of subject-matter jurisdiction or defects in the removal procedure. See 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c). The removing party bears the burden of establishing federal jurisdiction. Emrich v. Touche Ross & Co, 846 F.2d 1190, 1195 (9th Cir. 1988).



2. Analysis
McClellon asserts that this Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction over his claims because there is not a complete diversity of citizenship, the amount in controversy requirement is not met, and [*4]  none of the claims raise a federal question. (Dkt. No. 17 at 1-4.)

The Court finds that it has diversity jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. section 1332. McClellon is a citizen of Washington, and Wells Fargo, as a national bank, is a citizen of the state where its main office is located: South Dakota. (See Dkt. Nos. 1 at 2, 1-2 at 1); see 28 U.S.C. § 1348; Rouse v. Wachovia Mortg., FSB, 747 F.3d 707, 715 (9th Cir. 2014) ("[U]nder § 1348, a national banking association is a citizen only of the state in which its main office is located.") Thus, there is complete diversity between the parties.

The amount in controversy requirement is also met even though McClellon's complaint does not specify the amount sought. "Where it is not facially evident from the complaint that more than $75,000 is in controversy, the removing party must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the amount in controversy meets the jurisdictional threshold." Matheson v. Progressive Specialty Ins. Co., 319 F.3d 1089, 1090 (9th Cir. 2003). In determining the amount in controversy, district courts may consider "facts presented in the removal petition as well as any 'summary-judgement-type evidence relevant to the amount in controversy at the time of removal.'" Id. (quoting Singer v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 116 F.3d 373, 377 (9th Cir. 1997)). Although McClellon's complaint does not explicitly state the total damages sought, it does state that Wells Fargo's negligence [*5]  prevented him from purchasing 14,829.46 Ethereum. (Dkt. No. 1 at 3.) Wells Fargo represents that McClellon attested at arbitration that the Ethereum was worth at least $300,000 in March 2017, when the alleged transactions occurred.2Link to the text of the note (Dkt. No. 1-2 at 3.) The Court finds that Wells Fargo has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the amount in controversy exceeds $75,000.

The Court therefore has subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. section 1332. Plaintiff's motion to remand is DENIED.



B. Defendant's Motion to Dismiss

1. Legal Standard
A defendant may move for dismissal when a plaintiff "fails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted." Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). To grant a motion to dismiss, the Court must be able to conclude that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, even after accepting all factual allegations in the complaint as true and construing them in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Fleming v. Pickard, 581 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2009). However, to survive a motion to dismiss, a plaintiff must cite facts supporting a "plausible" cause of action. Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555-56, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). Although the Court must accept as true a complaint's well-pleaded facts, "conclusory allegations of law and unwarranted inferences will not defeat an otherwise [*6]  proper motion to dismiss." Vasquez v. L.A. County, 487 F.3d 1246, 1249 (9th Cir. 2007). A dismissal under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) "can [also] be based on the lack of a cognizable legal theory." Balistreri v. Pacifica Police Dep't, 901 F.2d 696, 699 (9th Cir. 1988).

Typically, the Court looks only at the face of the complaint to decide a motion to dismiss. Van Buskirk v. Cable News Network, Inc., 284 F.3d 977, 980 (9th Cir. 2002). However, at any stage of the proceeding, the Court may judicially notice a fact that is not subject to reasonable dispute because it can be accurately and readily determined from sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. Fed. R. Evid. 201(b)(2),(d). Accordingly, courts may judicially notice an arbitration decision where its authenticity cannot be reasonably questioned. See id.; Fairbank v. Underwood, 986 F. Supp. 2d 1222, 1226 (D. Or. 2013) (taking judicial notice of an arbitration award by a for-profit arbitration company); Papai v. Harbor Tug & Barge Co., 67 F.3d 203, 207 (9th Cir. 1995), rev'd on other grounds, 520 U.S. 548, 117 S. Ct. 1535, 137 L. Ed. 2d 800 (1997) (taking judicial notice of an arbitration before an Administrative Law Judge).



2. Analysis
Wells Fargo asserts that res judicata bars McClellon's claims from being relitigated. In Washington, "[f]iling two separate lawsuits based on the same event . . . is precluded[.]" Ensley v. Pitcher, 152 Wn. App. 891, 222 P.3d 99, 102 (Wash. Ct. App. 2009). The doctrine of res judicata requires identity between a prior judgment and a subsequent action as to (1) persons and parties, (2) causes of action, (3) subject matter, and (4) quality of parties. Karlberg v. Otten, 167 Wn. App. 522, 280 P.3d 1123, 1130 (Wash. Ct. App. 2012). Res judicata also requires a final judgment [*7]  on the merits. Id. This doctrine "applies to every point which properly belonged to the subject of [prior] litigation, and which the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, might have brought forward at the time." Feminist Women's Health Ctr. v. Codispoti, 63 F.3d 863, 868 (9th Cir. 1995).

The Court finds that the persons and parties and the quality of parties are identical in the arbitration and the instant lawsuit. See Codispoti, 63 F.3d at 867. Both suits involve McClellon as the plaintiff and Wells Fargo as the defendant.

The Court also determines that McClellon's claims involve the same cause of action and the same subject matter as the arbitration. See Landry v. Luscher, 95 Wn. App. 779, 785, 976 P.2d 1274 (Wash. 1999) (recognizing that the subject matter prong is similar to the cause of action prong and that "the critical factors for subject matter are the nature of the claim or cause of action and the parties.") To determine whether causes of action are identical, Washington courts consider whether the two suits arise from the same transactional nucleus of facts. Costantini v. Trans World Airlines, 681 F.2d 1199, 1202 (9th Cir. 1982) cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1087, 103 S. Ct. 570, 74 L. Ed. 2d 932 (1982). Although McClellon's complaint is factually sparse, in both this action and the arbitration he alleges that Wells Fargo's negligence prevented him from purchasing 14,289.46 Ethereum on March 3, 2017. (Compare Dkt. No. 1-2 at 1, with Dkt. No. 11 at 31.) He also requests [*8]  the same relief. (Compare Dkt. No. 1-2 at 3, with Dkt. No. 11 at 36.) Finally, McClellon's response to Wells Fargo's motion to dismiss does not contradict Wells Fargo's assertion that the arbitration and this suit arise from an identical nucleus of fact. (See Dkt. No. 17.) These factors lead the Court to conclude that the cause of action and subject matter prongs of res judicata are satisfied.

Finally, the Court must address whether the arbitration qualifies as a final judgment on the merits. The Ninth Circuit has recognized that arbitration decisions can have a "res judicata or collateral estoppel effect." Clark v. Bear Stearns & Co., 966 F.2d 1318, 1321 (9th Cir. 1992). "The party asserting preclusion bears the burden of showing with clarity and certainty what was determined by prior judgment." Id. When applying res judicata to an arbitration proceeding, the court examines "the record, if one exits, including any findings of the arbitrators." Id. The court must then decide "whether a rational factfinder could have reached a conclusion based upon an issue other than that which the defendant seeks to foreclose." Id. "When the issue for which preclusion is sought is the only rational one the [arbitrator] could have found, then that issue is considered [*9]  foreclosed, even if no explicit finding on that issue has been made" Id.

The Court finds that the arbitration qualifies as a final judgment. (See Dkt. No. 11 at 32-34.) An examination of the arbitration complaint and the arbitrator's findings leads the Court to conclude that the arbitrator addressed the issues that McClellon raises in the instant suit when he resolved the arbitration dispute. (Compare Dkt. No. 11 at 6, with Dkt. No. 11 at 30-36.) In addition, McClellon does not challenge the finality of the arbitration judgment. (See Dkt. No. 17.) Rather, he contends that the arbitration was invalid because three of his companies allegedly affected by Wells Fargo were not parties to the proceedings. (Id. at 4.) He also disputes the arbitrator's conclusion that some of his evidence was fraudulent. (Id. at 5.)

McClellon's arguments collaterally attack the legitimacy of the arbitration. The Ninth Circuit has disapproved of such attacks on arbitration proceedings. See Sander v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 966 F.2d 501, 503 (9th Cir. 1992) (describing the Circuit Court's unwillingness to "upset the streamlined nature of arbitration by permitting . . . collateral attacks"). Furthermore, the fact that three of McClellon's companies were not a party to the arbitration is irrelevant; [*10]  they are not a party to this lawsuit either. (See Dkt. No. 1-2.) For these reasons, the Court finds that the arbitration was a valid final judgment.

The Court finds that each element of res judicata is satisfied and therefore holds that McClellon's instant lawsuit is barred by res judicata. Accordingly, McClellon's complaint is DISMISSED with prejudice.



III. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff's motion to remand (Dkt. No. 17) is DENIED. Defendant's motion to dismiss (Dkt. No. 10) is GRANTED and Plaintiff's complaint is DISMISSED with prejudice and without leave to amend. The Clerk is DIRECTED to send a copy of this order to Plaintiff.

DATED this 31st day of July 2018.

/s/ John C. Coughenour

John C. Coughenour

UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Ethereum is a cryptocurrency. (Dkt. No. 10 at 3.)

2Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court notes the Ethereum is worth nearly $7,000,000 today. ETH/USD - Ethereum US Dollar. INVESTING.COM, https://www.investing.com/crypto/ethereum/eth-usd-converter (enter 14,829.46 into the "Ethereum" field) (July 27, 2018).

 THIS CAUSE is before the Court upon Plaintiffs' Unopposed Motion for Preliminary Approval of Class Action Settlement, [DE 73] (the "Motion"). The Court has carefully reviewed the Motion, the parties' Settlement Agreement, [DE73-1] (the "Settlement Agreement") and all exhibits thereto, the record in this case and applicable law, and is otherwise fully advised in the premises. It is hereby ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that:

1. Settlement. Plaintiffs, the Receiver James [*2]  Salah, acting on behalf of Defendant Project Investors, Inc. d/b/a Cryptsy ("Cryptsy") and Defendant Lorie Ann Nettles ("Nettles") have negotiated a potential settlement of this action as against Defendant Nettles (the "Cryptsy Litigation" or the "Action") to avoid the expense, uncertainties, and burden of protracted litigation, and to resolve the Released Claims (as defined herein and in the Settlement Agreement) against Defendant Nettles.

2. Review. Settlement "has special importance in class actions with their notable uncertainty, difficulties of proof, and length. Settlements of complex cases contribute greatly to the efficient use of judicial resources, and achieve the speedy resolution of justice[.]" Turner v. Gen. Elec. Co., No. 2:05—CV—186—FTM—99DNF, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 65144, 2006 WL 2620275, at *2 (M.D.Fla. Sept. 13, 2006). For these reasons, "[p]ublic policy strongly favors the pretrial settlement of class action lawsuits." In re U.S. Oil & Gas Litig., 967 F.2d 489, 493 (11th Cir.1992). "Approval of a class action settlement is a two-step process." Fresco v. Auto Data Direct, Inc., No. 03—cv—61063, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37863, 2007 WL 2330895, at *4 (S.D.Fla. May 11, 2007). Preliminary approval is the first step, requiring the Court to "make a preliminary determination on the fairness, reasonableness, and adequacy of the settlement terms." Id. In the second step, after notice to the class [*3]  and time and opportunity for absent class members to object or otherwise be heard, the court considers whether to grant final approval. Smith v. Wm. Wrigley Jr. Co., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 67832, 2010 WL 2401149, at *2 (S.D. Fla. June 15, 2010). "Preliminary approval is appropriate where the proposed settlement is the result of the parties' good faith negotiations, there are no obvious deficiencies and the settlement falls within the range of reason." Id. At the preliminary approval stage, district courts consider whether the proposed settlement appears to be "'the result of informed, good-faith, arms'-length negotiation between the parties and their capable and experienced counsel' and not 'the result of collusion[.]'" Torres v. Bank of Am. (In re Checking Account), 830 F. Supp. 2d 1330, 1341 (S.D. Fla. 2011). Applying this standard, the Court has carefully reviewed the Settlement Agreement, as well as the files, records, and proceedings to date in this matter. The terms and conditions in the Settlement Agreement are hereby incorporated as though fully set forth in this Order, and, unless otherwise indicated, capitalized terms in this Order shall have the meanings attributed to them in the Settlement Agreement.

3. Preliminary Approval. The Court hereby preliminarily approves the Settlement entered into by the Parties, and the exhibits appended to the Motion. The Court finds that [*4]  the Settlement was of informed, good-faith, arms'-length negotiations between the Parties and their capable and experienced counsel and was completed with the assistance of the Hon. Howard Tescher (ret.), an experienced mediator with particular expertise in complex commercial and financial disputes. The Court further finds that the Settlement, including the exhibits appended to the Motion, is within the range of reasonableness and possible judicial approval, such that: (a) a presumption of fairness is appropriate for the purposes of preliminary settlement approval; and (b) it is appropriate to effectuate notice to the Settlement Class, as set forth below and in the Settlement, and schedule a Final Approval Hearing to assist the Court in determining whether to grant Final Approval to the Settlement and enter Final Judgment.

4. Settlement Class Relief. The proposed Settlement Relief to the Settlement Class Members, as identified in Section I of the Settlement Agreement, is approved on a preliminary basis as fair, reasonable, and adequate. The Settlement Class shall consist of:

(a) All CRYPTSY account owners who held Bitcoins, alternative cryptocurrencies, or any other form of monies or [*5]  currency at CRYPTSY as of November 1, 2015 to the present. Excluded from the Class are: (1) employees of CRYPTSY, including its shareholders, officers and directors and members of their immediate families; (2) any judge to whom this action is assigned and the judge's immediate family; and (3) persons who timely and validly opt to exclude themselves from the Class.

(b) The Settlement Class Period shall commence on November 1, 2015 and shall continue through and including the date of this Preliminary Approval Order.

5. Preliminary Certification of Settlement Class. The Court makes the following preliminary determinations, for purposes of a settlement class only under Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(e), as to certification of the Settlement Class:

(a) The Court preliminarily certifies the Settlement Class for purposes of settlement only, under Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(a) and (b)(3);

(b) The Settlement Class is so numerous that joinder of all members is impracticable;

(c) There are questions of law or fact common to the members of the Settlement Class;

(d) The claims of the Plaintiffs are typical of the claims of the other members of the Settlement Class;

(e) Plaintiffs are capable of fairly and adequately protecting the interests of the members of the Settlement [*6]  Class, in connection with the Settlement Agreement;

(f) For purposes of settlement, in which there will be no trial and the Court is not presented with trial manageability issues, common questions of law and fact predominate over questions affecting only individual members of the Settlement Class;

(g) The Settlement Class is ascertainable; and

(h) Resolution of the claims in this Litigation by way of a nationwide settlement is superior to other available methods for the fair and efficient resolution of the claims of the Settlement Class.

6. Designation of Class Representative. Brandon Liedel and Michael Wilson are designated as representatives of the Settlement Class for the sole purpose of seeking a settlement of the Wilson Litigation.

7. Designation of Class Counsel. The law firms of Wites & Kapetan, P.A. and Silver Law Group are hereby designated as Class Counsel for the Settlement Class.

8. Final Approval Hearing. A hearing regarding final approval of the Settlement ("Final Approval Hearing") will be held at 10:30am on Feb 17, 2017 before the Honorable Kenneth A. Marra in Courtroom #4 at the Paul G. Rogers Federal Building and US Courthouse, 701 Clematis Street, West Palm Beach, FL 33401 [*7] , to determine, among other things: (i) whether the Settlement of the Cryptsy Litigation should be approved as fair, reasonable, and adequate; (ii) whether the Cryptsy Litigation should be dismissed with prejudice pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Agreement as against the Settling Defendant; (iii) whether Settlement Class Members should be bound by the Release set forth in the Settlement Agreement; (iv) whether Settlement Class Members should be subject to a permanent injunction which, among other things, bars Settlement Class Members from filing, commencing, prosecuting, intervening in, participating in (as class members or otherwise), organizing, or soliciting the participation of other Settlement Class Members, or any persons who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class but who exclude themselves from the Settlement, to pursue any action in any jurisdiction based on or relating to any of the Released Claims or the facts and circumstances relating thereto; and (v) whether the application of Class Counsel for an award of Attorneys' Fees and expenses, and the proposed Case Contribution Award To Plaintiffs, should be approved.

The Court may (i) approve [*8]  the Settlement Agreement, with such modifications as may be agreed to by the parties, without further notice; and (ii) adjourn the final approval hearing from time to time, by oral announcement at the hearing without further notice. The Court retains exclusive jurisdiction over the litigation to consider all further matters arising out of or in connection with the proposed settlement.

9. Class Notice.

(a) The Court approves the Class Notice in the Settlement Agreement, including the Mail Notice attached as Exhibit B to the Settlement Agreement and the manner of providing Mail Notice to Settlement Class Members described in Section IV of the Settlement Agreement. The Court finds that this is the best practicable notice under the circumstances and is reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise potential Settlement Class Members of the pendency of the Action, to apprise persons who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class of their right to exclude themselves from the proposed Settlement Class, and to apprise Settlement Class Members of their right to object to the proposed Settlement and their right to appear at the Final Approval Hearing. The [*9]  Court further finds that Mail Notice and the other forms of Class Notice in the Settlement Agreement are reasonable, constitute due, adequate, and sufficient notice to all persons entitled to receive notice, and meet the requirements of due process.

(b) The Mail Notice shall be mailed so as to be received not less than ninety (90) days before the date set by the Court for a Final Approval Hearing regarding the Settlement. The Mail Notice shall include the Claim Instructions and Proof of Claim Form (attached as Exhibit A to the Settlement Agreement).

(c) No later than the posting of the Mail Notice, the Settlement Administrator shall establish an Internet site (the "Settlement Website") which shall contain copies of the Settlement Agreement and Exhibits and the Mail Notice. The Settlement Website shall also contain Claim Form Instructions and a Claim Form which may be downloaded or printed from the Settlement Website. Settlement Class Members may complete, sign and upload a Claim Form to the Settlement Website, provided that for those Claims requiring verification documents, scanned copies of those verification documents are uploaded to the Settlement Website with the appropriate Claim [*10]  number to associate the upload with the Claim. In addition, the Settlement Website shall allow for the option of completing Claim Forms online within the Settlement Website, utilizing an e-signature format. However, when the Claim Form is completed online, the Settlement Class Member must separately upload the required verification documents to the Settlement Website pursuant to the instructions on the Settlement Website no later than the Claim Deadline. The Settlement Website shall have a Uniform Resource Locator which identifies the Settlement Website as www.CryptsySettlement.com. The Settlement Website shall remain open and accessible through the last day for Settlement Class Members to submit a Claim for Settlement Relief.

(d) Not less than forty-five (45) days before the date set by the Court for the Final Approval Hearing regarding this Settlement, the Settlement Administrator shall have caused the summary notice provided for in Section IV.A.2 of the Settlement Agreement to have been published twice.

(e) The Settlement Administrator shall establish a toll-free phone number through which settlement class members can obtain information about this Settlement, including information [*11]  about the Claim Form, utilizing the relevant portions of the language contained in the Notice and Claim Form. The phone number shall remain open and accessible through the Claim Deadline. The Settlement Administrator shall make reasonable provision for Class Counsel to be promptly advised of recorded messages left on the phone number by potential Settlement Class Members concerning the Action and/or this Settlement, so that Class Counsel may timely and accurately respond to such inquiries; provided however, the Administrator shall review the recorded messages before providing them to Class Counsel, and if one or more of the messages requests a blank Claim Form or other similar administrative assistance only, then the Administrator shall handle such administrative request(s), but the Administrator shall provide all other messages to Class Counsel for any further response to the Settlement Class Member.

(f) No later than ten (10) days prior to the Final Approval Hearing, Class Counsel shall obtain from the Settlement Administrator and shall file with the Court a proof of mailing of the Mail Notice, proof of publication of the summary notice two times, proof of establishment of the Settlement [*12]  Website, and proof of the establishment of the toll-free phone number required under Paragraphs 9(a)-(e) above.

10. Administrators. The Court authorizes and directs the Receiver and Plaintiffs' Settlement Counsel to retain one or more Administrators to implement the terms of the Settlement Agreement, and authorizes and directs such Administrators to (i) mail and email, as applicable, the Mail Notice and publish the summary notice, (ii) establish the toll free phone line system, (iii) establish the Settlement Website, (iv) receive and process settlement claims, and (v) carry out such other responsibilities as are provided for in the Settlement Agreement or may be agreed to by the Parties in the Action.

11. Exclusion from the Settlement Class. Any person who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class who wishes to be excluded from the Settlement Class must send a written Request for Exclusion to the Settlement Administrator, by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address provided in the Mail Notice and Settlement Website. Any such Request for Exclusion must be postmarked no later than thirty (30) days before the Final Approval Hearing.

(a) To be valid, the [*13]  Request for Exclusion must: (a) identify the case name and number; (b) identify the name and address of the person requesting exclusion; (c) be personally signed by the person requesting exclusion; and (d) contain a statement that indicates a desire to be excluded from the Settlement Class in the Cryptsy Litigation, such as "I hereby request that I be excluded from the proposed Settlement Class in the Cryptsy Class Action." Mass or class opt outs shall not be allowed.

(b) A person who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class who desires to opt out must take timely affirmative written action pursuant to this Order and the Settlement Agreement, even if the person desiring to opt out of the Settlement Class (a) files or has filed a separate action against any of the Released Persons, or (b) is, or becomes, a putative class member in any other class action filed against any of the Released Persons.

(c) Settlement Class Members will be deemed to be Settlement Class Members for all purposes under the Agreement, and upon the Final Settlement Date, will be bound by its terms, including, but not limited to, the Releases in Section VIII of the Settlement Agreement.

(d) [*14]  If the proposed settlement is approved, Settlement Class Members shall be bound by all subsequent proceedings, orders, and judgments in this Action, even if he or she has pending, or subsequently initiates, litigation against the Settling Defendant relating to any of the Released Claims to Settlement Agreement.

12. Objections and Appearances. Settlement Class Members who comply with the requirements of this Paragraph may object to any aspect of the proposed settlement either on his or her own or through an attorney hired at his or her expense. Any Settlement Class Member who wishes to object to the Settlement Agreement must do so in writing and must file with the Clerk of Court and serve on Class Counsel and Defendants' Counsel, at the addresses listed below, a written statement of objection in accordance with the requirements set forth below and in the Settlement Agreement no later than thirty (30) days before the Final Approval Hearing:

For Plaintiff and Settlement Class

Marc Wites, Esq.

WITES & KAPETAN, P.A.

4400 N. Federal Highway

Lighthouse Point, Florida 33064

Phone: (954) 570-8989/Fax: (954) 354-0205

For Receiver James Salah, on behalf of Cryptsy

Patrick Rengstl, Esq.

PAYTON & RENGSTL, [*15]  LLC

2 South Biscayne Blvd.

Suite 1600

Miami, FL 33131

For Defendant Lorie Ann Nettles

Mark A. Levy, Esq.

Brinkley Morgan

200 East Las Olas Blvd. - 19th Floor

Fort Lauderdale, FL 33301

(a) The requirements to assert a valid written objection shall be set forth in the Class Notice and on the Settlement Website, and shall include: (a) the case name and number; (b) the name, address, telephone number of the Person objecting and, if represented by counsel, of his/her counsel; (c) the basis for the objection; and (d) a statement of whether he/she intends to appear at the Final Approval Hearing, either with or without counsel;

(b) Any Settlement Class Member who fails to object to the Settlement in the manner described in the Class Notice and consistent with this Section shall be deemed to have waived any such objection, shall not be permitted to object to any terms or approval of the Settlement at the Final Approval Hearing, and shall be foreclosed from seeking any review of the Settlement or the terms of the Agreement by appeal or other means;

(c) Any Settlement Class Member who submits a timely written objection may appear, in person or by counsel, at the Final Approval Hearing held by the Court, [*16]  to show cause why the proposed Settlement Agreement should not be approved as fair, adequate, and reasonable, provided that the objecting Settlement Class Member: (a) files with the Clerk of the Court a notice of intention to appear at the Final Approval Hearing ("Notice of Intention to Appear"), which must include the case name and number and the Settlement Class Member's name, address, telephone number, and signature, by the Objection Deadline; and (b) serves the Notice of Intention to Appear on all counsel designated in the Class Notice by the Objection Deadline. The Notice of Intention to Appear must include copies of any papers, exhibits, or other evidence that the objecting Settlement Class Member will present to the Court in support of their objection at the Final Approval Hearing. Any attorney who intends to represent an objecting Settlement Class Member at the Final Approval Hearing must do so at the Settlement Class Member's expense and must file a notice of appearance at least two weeks before the Final Approval Hearing. Any Settlement Class Member who does not file a Notice of Intention to Appear in accordance with the deadlines and other specifications set forth in the [*17]  Agreement and Class Notice will not be entitled to appear at the Final Approval Hearing to raise any objections.

13. Releases. If the Settlement is Finally Approved, the Releasing Persons shall release the Released Persons from all Released Claims (the definitions of "Releasing Persons," "Released Persons" and "Released Claims" set forth in Sections I and VIII of the Settlement Agreement are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference), including, inter alia, and without limitation, all claims, charges, or demands that relate, concern, arise from, or pertain in any way to the Released Persons' conduct, policies, or practices concerning all allegations and any and all claims and/or causes of action that were or could have been asserted against the Settling Defendant in the Cryptsy Litigation.

14. Attorneys' Fees and Expenses, and Case Contribution Awards. Defendants agree not to oppose an application for the award of Attorneys' Fees not to exceed 1/3 of the Settlement Fund, plus Expenses. Plaintiffs and Class Counsel agree not to seek an award of Attorneys' Fees greater than 1/3 of the Settlement Fund, plus costs and expenses in the Action. Defendants also agree not to oppose the application [*18]  for a Case Contribution Award of $500.00 each for the Named Plaintiffs Brandon Liedel and Michael Wilson for their work and assistance in this Action. Plaintiffs and Class Counsel agree not to seek a Case Contribution Award in excess of $500.00 for each Named Plaintiff.

15. Preliminary Injunction. All Settlement Class Members are hereby preliminarily enjoined from directly or indirectly (i) filing, commencing, prosecuting, intervening in, or participating in (as class members or otherwise), any lawsuit in any jurisdiction for the Released Claims; or (ii) organizing any Settlement Class Members, or persons who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class but who request exclusion from the Settlement Class, into a separate class for purposes of pursuing as a purported class action any lawsuit (including by seeking to amend a pending complaint or counterclaim to include class allegations, or seeking class certification in a pending action) based on or relating to the claims and causes of action, or the facts and circumstances relating thereto, in this Action and/or the Released Claims.

16. Service of Papers. Defendants' Counsel and Class Counsel shall serve on each [*19]  other and on all other parties who have filed notices of appearance, at or before the Final Approval Hearing, any further documents in support of the proposed Settlement, including responses to any papers filed by Settlement Class Members. Defendants' Counsel and Class Counsel shall promptly furnish to each other any and all objections or written requests for exclusion that may come into their possession and shall file such objections or requests for exclusion with the Court on or before the date of the Final Approval Hearing.

17. Termination of Settlement. This Order shall become null and void, and shall be without prejudice to the rights of the Parties, all of whom shall be restored to their respective positions existing immediately before this Court entered this Order, if (i) the proposed Settlement is not finally approved by the Court, or does not become Final, pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Agreement; or (ii) the Settlement Agreement is terminated pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Agreement for any reason. In such event, and except as provided therein, the proposed Settlement and Settlement Agreement shall become null and void and be of no further force and effect; [*20]  the preliminary certification of the Settlement Class for settlement purposes shall be automatically vacated; neither the Settlement Agreement nor the Court's Orders, including this Order, shall be used or referred to for any purpose whatsoever; and the Parties shall retain, without prejudice, any and all objections, arguments, and defenses with respect to class certification.

18. Use of Order Following Termination of Settlement. This Order shall be of no force and effect if the Settlement does not become Final and shall not be construed or used as an admission, concession, or declaration by or against any Defendant of any fault, wrongdoing, breach, liability, or appropriateness of contested class certification, or by or against any Plaintiff or the Settlement Class Members, or persons who would otherwise fall within the definition of the Settlement Class but who request exclusion from the Settlement Class, that their claims lack merit or that the relief requested in the Second Amended Class Complaint in this Action is inappropriate, improper, or unavailable, or as a waiver by any party of any defenses they may have.

19. Necessary Steps. The Court authorizes the Parties to take all necessary [*21]  and appropriate steps to implement the Settlement Agreement.

DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers this 26th day of October, 2016, at West Palm Beach, Palm Beach County in the Southern District of Florida.

/s/ Kenneth A. Marra

KENNETH A. MARRA

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT JUDGE

. Before the Panel:*Link to the text of the note Anthony Motto, a plaintiff in an action pending in the Northern District of Illinois (Greene), moves to centralize three actions in the Northern District of Illinois. In addition to Greene, the two other actions are pending in the Central District of California and the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, as listed on the attached Schedule A.1Link to the text of the note Responding defendant Mizuho Bank Ltd. opposes centralization.

On the basis of the papers filed and the hearing session held, we deny plaintiff's motion. These actions share factual issues regarding responsibility for the early 2014 collapse of Mt. Gox, which at one time was the world's largest bitcoin trading exchange.2Link to the text of the note Notwithstanding this factual commonality, there are only three actions. All plaintiffs (including plaintiffs in the two actions referenced in footnote 1) are represented by one law firm, and Mizuho has the same counsel in all cases, as well. Mizuho states that it "is prepared to stipulate to use all discovery from the Illinois action in both the California and Pennsylvania [**2]  actions." Mizuho Opp. at 10 (ECF No. 11). Indeed, there appears to be no discovery remaining to be done in the Illinois action - fact discovery closed on August 31, 2017, and the expert discovery cutoff was February 6, 2018. Given the small number of actions, the overlap in counsel, and the advanced status of the Illinois action, centralization under Section 1407 is not warranted.

IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that the motion for centralization of these actions is denied.
 I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Pursuant to a Stipulation and Agreement of Settlement dated December 7, 2015, the plaintiffs agreed to settle the claims they were pursuing against the defendants in return for a payment of $2.74 per share plus interest. The stipulation defined the class as follows: [*3] 

[A]ll record holders and beneficial owners of common stock of Dole during the period commencing June 11, 2013 and ending November 1, 2013, together with their successors and assigns. Excluded from the Class are Defendants, and each of their affiliates, legal representatives, heirs, successors in interest, transferees and assigns. Also excluded from the Class are [ten petitioners in the related appraisal action (the "Appraisal Petitioners")], except to the extent any such Appraisal Petitioners owned shares of Dole common stock at the Closing that were not the subject of a perfected appraisal demand.

Dkt. 750, ¶ 1(d). The parties stipulated in the pre-trial order that holders of 54,084,157 shares of Dole common stock were unaffiliated with the defendants. Dkt. 648, ¶ 6. For purposes of the class definition, holders of 17,290,399 shares were "Appraisal Petitioners." Dkt. 787 at 1.n.2. The class therefore comprised holders of 36,793,758 shares.
On February 10, 2016, the court approved the settlement. The stipulated form of final order provided that the "Settlement Administrator shall make distributions to Settlement Payment Recipients in the manner and subject to the conditions set forth in the [*4]  Stipulation." Dkt. 780, ¶ 18.

The defendants paid the settlement amount on March 28, 2016. Including interest, the total payment was $115,793,059.57. Counsel deducted from this amount the awards that the court approved for attorneys' fees and expenses.

A.B. Data served as the Settlement Administrator. Beginning on December 11, 2015, A.B. Data mailed notices and claim forms to potential class members, brokers, and other nominees. In total, A.B. Data mailed 24,322 notice packets. A.B. Data disseminated a summary notice via PR Newswire and published the summary notice in the Investor Business Daily. The notices instructed class members to submit claims to A.B. Data by April 11, 2016. A.B. Data set up a telephone hotline and a website to assist potential class members.

In total, A.B. Data received 4,662 claims: (i) 874 from paper filers and (ii) 3,788 from e-filers. Paper filers are typically individuals or small holders who submit claims by mailing back the claims forms and providing hard copies of supporting documents. E-filers are typically institutional investors. They may be involved in hundreds or thousands of transactions during the class period, and they submit their claims using [*5]  a computerized system.

After uploading the paper claims and merging them with the electronic claims to create a single database, A.B. Data reviewed the claims for deficiencies. A.B. Data identified deficiencies for 411 paper claims and 2,547 electronic claims. A.B. Data mailed letters to the paper filers that identified the deficiencies and asked for additional information. A.B. Data mailed letters to the e-filers that instructed them to review an Excel spreadsheet that A.B. Data emailed separately with details about their deficiencies. If a claimant cured a deficiency, then A.B. Data updated its database.

At the conclusion of the claims process, claimants had submitted facially eligible claims for 49,164,415 shares. That figure substantially exceeded the 36,793,758 shares in the class.

A.B. Data and class counsel took a number of steps to investigate the discrepancy. Beginning in September 2016, A.B. Data reviewed the paper and electronic claims a second time to identify ineligible shares. A.B. Data also reviewed again the documentation that claimants had submitted to support their claims. In many instances, claimants had provided month-end account statements that reflected the receipt [*6]  of the merger consideration. Ordinarily, that would be sufficient to validate the number of shares a claimant held at the effective time and hence the validity of a claim to the settlement consideration for that number of shares.

In addition, A.B. Data requested additional documentation from the largest e-filers, and class counsel obtained a security positions report from DTC, commonly known as a "Cede breakdown." A Cede breakdown reflects the number of shares of an issuer's common stock that DTC participant banks and brokers hold as of a given date as reflected on DTC's centralized ledger. Class counsel obtained a Cede breakdown for DTC that showed the participant holdings in Dole common stock as of close of business on November 1, 2013, when the merger closed.

Using the additional documentation and Cede breakdown, A.B. Data attempted to match the largest claims against corresponding positions on the Cede breakdown. Through this process, A.B. Data reduced the discrepancy by only 48,758 shares.

A.B. Data next sent letters to 127 DTC participants in an effort to verify their share counts. A.B. Data also mailed letters to the 78 largest e-filers requesting further documentation. The response [*7]  was tepid, with only 18 DTC participants and 17 e-filers deigning to respond. The responses that A.B. Data received did not help materially in reducing the discrepancy.

In an effort to find the root cause, class counsel spoke with a DTC representative about the accuracy of the positions reflected on the Cede breakdown. The representative explained that DTC placed "chills" on its records for its participants' positions in Dole common stock as of the close of business on November 1. A "chill" restricts a participant's ability to deposit or withdraw the security. See U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, Fast Answers: DTC Chills, available at http://www.sec.gov.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/answers/dtc-chills.htm. Once DTC initiated the chills, the participants' positions in Dole common stock were locked in and could not change. At 6:00 p.m. on November 1, DTC generated the Cede breakdown that it later used to distribute the merger consideration. On Monday, November 4, DTC distributed the merger consideration to its participants using the Cede breakdown. DTC later provided class counsel with a copy of the same Cede breakdown.

The discussions with the DTC representative also revealed a problem: DTC's centralized ledger did not reflect all of the trades in [*8]  Dole common stock on the day of the merger or during the two days preceding it. Under the current standard of T+3 for clearing trades, DTC did not receive information about all of the transactions that took place on October 30, October 31, or November 1. The DTC participants who facilitated transactions that had not yet cleared when the merger closed were responsible for properly allocating the merger consideration among the parties to the transactions.

During the three-day period leading up to the closing of the Dole merger, more than 32 million shares of Dole common stock changed hands. The following table reflects the daily volume:

DATE	VOLUME
October 30, 2013	1,065,386 shares
October 31, 2013	13,102,481 shares
November 1, 2013	18,228,405 shares
When the merger closed, DTC's centralized ledger did not reflect all of these trades.

For purpose of the settlement, multiple owners could submit claims for shares involved in trades that had not cleared. A DTC participant who continued to hold the shares as reflected on DTC's records could submit a claim, but so could the beneficial owner who was a client of the DTC participant that acquired the shares and therefore owned them as of closing. Both [*9]  claims could appear facially valid even though they involved the same underlying shares.

In addition, as of October 31, 2013, traders had shorted approximately 2.9 million shares of Dole common stock. Because the price of Dole common stock traded above the merger price through closing, it is likely that traders shorted additional shares on November 1, resulting in even more shares in short positions as of closing.

HN1 In a typical short sale, the seller borrows a share from another stockholder and sells it. See In re Digex, Inc. S'holders Litig., 2002 Del. Ch. LEXIS 40, 2002 WL 749184, at *2 (Del. Ch. Apr. 16, 2002). The borrower only returns the borrowed share after the short position is closed. Id. Under current share-lending practices, brokers and custodial banks have authority to lend shares without the beneficial owner knowing that shares were "borrowed" from its account. The relationships that permit share-lending are documented in a combination of agreements between the account holders and their brokers or custodial banks and in other agreements between institutions who facilitate the short selling.

The shorting resulted in additional beneficial owners who received the merger consideration, who fell within the technical language of the class definition, and who could claim the settlement [*10]  consideration. Meanwhile, the lenders of the shares, not knowing that the shares were lent, also could claim the settlement consideration. This is another means by which two different claimants could submit facially valid claims for the same underlying shares.

Without obtaining detailed records about the millions of trades that took place during the three days leading up to the closing, it is impossible to determine who owned the shares as of closing. And obtaining those records is not realistically achievable. The data in DTC's centralized ledger does not reflect all of the trades executed during the three days before closing, and it only would show changes in the total number of shares held by its participants. To get at the underlying trades, A.B. Data would need records from over 800 DTC participant brokers and custodial banks. A.B. Data also potentially would need records from the individual clients of those brokers and custodial banks. A.B. Data already has asked the participants and e-filers to provide additional records. Many failed to respond, and the court has no readily available means to compel cooperation. Consequently, any effort to obtain the records necessary to conduct [*11]  the analysis promises to be an expensive and time-consuming exercise in futility.

But obtaining the records would be only the first hurdle. If cleared, determining the actual ownership of the shares comprising the class still would require a forensic audit of herculean proportions. The audit likely also would uncover additional disputes about who held the property right to claim the settlement consideration, particularly in situations involving borrowed shares. A.B. Data initially and the court subsequently would need to make determinations about who should receive the settlement consideration under the contractual agreements governing the relationships among beneficial owners. The journey down the rabbit hole would require mapping the entire warren.

It is therefore functionally impossible to resolve the share discrepancy in a practical or cost-effective manner. The resulting process would be lengthy, arduous, cumbersome, expensive, and fundamentally uncertain.1Link to the text of the note

Confronting these insuperable difficulties, class counsel determined that a more efficient method for distributing the settlement consideration [*12]  would be to use the same mechanism that DTC used to distribute the merger consideration. DTC advised class counsel that this process is feasible and requires payment of a base fee to DTC of $2,250, with the potential for additional consultation fees if difficulties arise. A.B. Data and class counsel have budgeted $10,000 for additional consultations.

To date, A.B. Data has incurred fees and expenses for settlement administration of $180,323.95. A.B. Data projects that shifting to the DTC distribution system will cost an additional $37,000, primarily due to the expense necessary to print and mail a supplemental notice.



II. LEGAL ANALYSIS
Class counsel seek leave to modify the settlement to replace the claims process with a pro rata distribution through DTC. I view their motion as a request to modify the plan of allocation for good cause shown.

HN2 A plan of allocation must be reasonable. In re Phila. Stock Exch., Inc., 945 A.2d 1123, 1137-38 (Del. 2008). A plan does not have to compensate all potential claimants equally. "A reasonable plan may consider the relative values of competing claims." Schultz v. Ginsburg, 965 A.2d 661, 667 (Del. 2009). In my view, a court also can take into account the administrative difficulties involved in achieving a proposed plan of allocation, including the anticipated expenses. [*13]  At the extreme, a plan could consume the bulk of the settlement proceeds on the administrative costs necessary to achieve a precise allocation. Tradeoffs are inevitable.

The original plan of allocation sought to allocate consideration among holders of Dole's shares in direct proportion to their holdings, as is appropriate in a case where the harm affected all shares equally. Although the original plan sought to produce a proportionate allocation, it would not in fact have achieved it. This is because the original plan allocated the net settlement proceeds across holders who submitted valid claims. If a holder did not submit a claim, or if a holder could not provide sufficient documentation to support a claim, then the holder would not receive its share. After the initial distribution, the original plan contemplated additional distributions to the holders who had submitted valid claims. Dkt. 750, ¶¶ 7-8. In a typical claims process, claims are made for fewer than the total number of shares in the class. When the remaining settlement consideration is allocated among those who made claims, those holders receive more than their proportionate share. As a practical matter, the original plan [*14]  of distribution would not have achieved a pro rata allocation among all class members, only a pro rata allocation among class members who made claims. All else equal, a claims-based plan of allocation disproportionately benefits large holders who have systems in place that make it efficient for them to submit claims with adequate documentation.

Because of short selling and the high volume of trading during the three days before the closing of the merger, the pattern in this case departed from the norm. Rather than receiving claims for fewer than the total number of shares in the class, A.B. Data received claims for many more. To reiterate, claims were made for 49,164,415 shares when the class only comprised 36,793,758 shares. By definition, claims for 12,370,657 shares are invalid, but it is impossible to determine which ones without a lengthy, arduous, cumbersome, and expensive process. Plus, it would require a degree of cooperation from DTC participants and e-filers far beyond what they have provided to date.

One solution would be to ignore the discrepancy, pretend as if the class comprised holders of 49,164,415 shares, and distribute the settlement consideration pro rata among those [*15]  claimants. In my view, that would be unjust. It would result in 25% of the consideration going to holders who should not receive it. As a consequence, the true holders of shares would receive only 75% of the settlement consideration to which they were entitled.

In my view, a superior solution is to grant the motion and permit class counsel to distribute the settlement consideration to record holders, including Cede. Through Cede, the consideration will flow to DTC and the custodial banks and brokers who are DTC participants. Through them, it will flow to the client institutions who held shares through the DTC participants.

This outcome is consistent with Delaware law. HN3 A series of Delaware Supreme Court decisions have made clear that a Delaware corporation only is required to recognize its record holders and need not attempt to determine its beneficial holders.2Link to the text of the note This principle extends to settlements. See In re Activision Blizzard, Inc. S'holder Litig., 124 A.3d 1025, 1061 (Del. Ch. 2015) (holding that for a notice of settlement be legally sufficient, a corporation only need mail it to its record holders). The modified plan of allocation will result in the settlement consideration being distributed to Dole's record holders.

The modified plan of allocation also recognizes [*16]  that the Delaware law claims that provided the principal basis for the settlement were property rights associated with the shares. As shares changed hands, these property rights traveled with the shares. Id. at 1045; accord In re Prodigy Commc'ns Corp. S'holders Litig., 2002 Del. Ch. LEXIS 95, 2002 WL 1767543, at *4 (Del. Ch. July 26, 2002); In re Resorts Int'l S'holders Litig., 1988 Del. Ch. LEXIS 130, 1988 WL 92749, at *10 (Del. Ch. Sept. 7, 1988). The record holders of the shares at the time of the closing of the merger therefore held the claims. Activision, 124 A.3d at 1049, 1051-52, 1056. The consideration logically should flow to the record holders as of the time of the merger.3Link to the text of the note

Distributing the merger consideration through the record holders and DTC also makes sense because that is how the merger consideration was distributed. The settlement consideration can be viewed as incremental merger consideration that the class should have received. From that perspective, it should be distributed the same way. That outcome makes all the more sense because DTC has advised class counsel that it has an established procedure for distributing settlement payments for mergers that DTC has processed. Although the parties to the settlement could be relieved of their obligation to search out Dole's beneficial owners in any event, the existence of the DTC procedure underscores the viability of this approach. It is also cost-effective. DTC will charge $2,250 for implementing [*17]  the procedure. Even including an allowance of $10,000 for consultations with DTC, the expense profile compares favorably with further efforts to resolve the ownership discrepancies through a claims process.

Under this method, it will be up to the DTC participants and their client institutions to resolve in the first instance any issues over who should receive the settlement consideration. Shifting the burden to them is efficient because they already had to address these issues for purposes of allocating the merger consideration. If new issues arise, the DTC participants and their client institutions have access to their own records, and they have visibility into the terms of their contractual relationships, such as the terms on which shares are borrowed. Any ensuing disputes are between the beneficial owners and their custodial banks and brokers. See Digex, 2002 Del. Ch. LEXIS 40, 2002 WL 749184, at *3. Those disputes should be resolved pursuant to the contractual mechanisms in the governing agreements or, if necessary, through a judicial proceeding limited to the parties. Addressing those disputes is not part of the settlement process and therefore not a task for A.B. Data or this court.4Link to the text of the note

It is possible that this process could result [*18]  in incremental costs for beneficial owners. A custodial bank or broker could err in processing the settlement consideration and the beneficial owner might not find out. Or a beneficial owner might have to sue its custodial bank or broker. HN4 These are risks inherent in choosing to hold in street name, and Delaware law leaves those risks with the beneficial owner who made that choice. See, e.g., Enstar, 535 A.2d at 1354. Notably, the level of ownership at which these issues would arise is a truly voluntary level of ownership between the custodial banks and brokers and their clients. There is nothing inequitable in forcing the beneficial owner to bear the consequences of its voluntary choice to hold shares through a particular institution.5Link to the text of the note

One potential problem is that under this method, consideration could flow to holders of shares that are excluded from the class under the terms of the settlement, such as shares for which appraisal was sought or those held by certain defendants. Class counsel, A.B. Data, and DTC have undertaken to ensure that none of the settlement fund is paid to excluded holders. DTC has indicated that it can tailor the distribution to bypass [*19]  the excluded holders if provided with the names of the account holders, the account numbers, the custodial banks or brokers, and the number of shares held in each account. The parties shall provide this information to DTC to the extent the information is within their possession, custody, or control.

Because this ruling changes the plan of allocation, notice will be distributed to the class. Class counsel has prepared a form of notice, which is approved as to form. A.B. Data will mail a copy of the notice to any holder that was sent a notice packet and a proof of claim, regardless of whether or not they submitted a claim or whether their claim was valid.



III. CONCLUSION
Class counsel has established good cause to modify the plan of allocation. The settlement consideration will be distributed to record holders, including Cede, and flow through DTC. A detailed form of order implementing this ruling will be entered.

It bears noting for future merger cases that the problems raised by short sales and trades during the three days before closing appear endemic to the depository system and hence likely infect every claims process. Nothing about either factor was unique to Dole. The only difference [*20]  was the magnitude of the discrepancy, which made the issues visible. Distributing the settlement consideration in merger cases to record holders from the outset would mitigate both pathologies and reduce overall administrative expenses, which in turn will benefit the class.

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
This problem is an unintended consequence of the top-down federal solution to the paperwork crisis that threatened Wall Street in the 1970s. Through the policy of share immobilization, Congress and the Securities and Exchange Commission addressed the crisis using the 1970s-era technologies of depository institutions, jumbo paper certificates, and a centralized ledger. See generally In re Appraisal of Dell Inc. (Dell Ownership), 2015 Del. Ch. LEXIS 184, 2015 WL 4313206, at *3-7 (Del. Ch. July 30, 2015).

It was an incomplete solution at the time. Since then, despite laudable and largely successful efforts by the incumbent intermediaries to keep the system working, the problems have grown. See, e.g., In re Appraisal of Dell Inc., 143 A.3d 20, 59 (Del. Ch. 2016) (holding that under current Delaware law, beneficial owners forfeited their appraisal rights by inadvertently voting in favor of the merger due to complexities created by depository system); Dell Ownership, 2015 Del. Ch. LEXIS 184, 2015 WL 4313206, at *9-10 (holding that under current Delaware law, beneficial owners forfeited their appraisal rights due to 8 administrative change in the name of the nominee on the share certificate necessitated by depository system).

Distributed ledger technology offers a potential technological solution by maintaining multiple, current copies of a single and comprehensive stock ownership ledger. The State of Delaware has announced its support for distributed ledger initiatives. See Marco A. Santori, Governor Jack Markell Announces Delaware Blockchain Initiative, global Delaware Blog (June 10, 2016), http://global.blogs. delaware.gov/2016/06/10/delaware-to-create-distributed-ledger-based-share-ownership-structure-as-part-of-blockchain-initiative/.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
See Enstar Corp. v. Senouf, 535 A.2d 1351, 1354 (Del. 1987); Olivetti Underwood Corp. v. Jacques Coe & Co., 42 Del. Ch. 588, 217 A.2d 683, 686 (Del. 1966); Am. Hardware Corp. v. Savage Arms Corp., 37 Del. Ch. 59, 136 A.2d 690, 692 (Del. 1957); Salt Dome Oil Corp. v. Schenck, 28 Del. Ch. 433, 41 A.2d 583, 584-89 (Del. 1945).

3Link to the location of the note in the document
This statement does not imply that only record holders could assert the claims. Nearly seventy years ago, this court recognized the right of a beneficial owner to assert equitable claims. See Rosenthal v. Burry Biscuit Corp., 30 Del. Ch. 299, 60 A.2d 106, 112 (Del. Ch. 1948) (Seitz, V.C.).

4Link to the location of the note in the document
To a degree, the settlement stipulation already contemplates this result. It defines the term "Custodians" as "a broker dealer, bank, sub-custodian, or other nominee that holds securities in its name on behalf of a beneficial owner." Dkt. 750, ¶ 1(h). It provides that "[f]or settlement funds distributed by a Custodian, the Custodian shall follow its respective policies with respect to further attempted distribution or escheatment." Id., ¶ 8(a). But it also contemplates that if a Custodian returns funds, the Settlement Administrator shall use its best efforts to locate the ultimate beneficial holder and re-attempt distribution. Id., ¶ 8(b). Under the modified plan of distribution, the Settlement Administrator need not make any efforts beyond identifying the record holder. If a Custodian errs and returns funds incorrectly, then the client may have a remedy against the Custodian, but the Settlement Administrator will have done all that it is obligated to do.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
By contrast, the depository level of ownership is not voluntary; it resulted from a federal mandate. I have therefore posited that Delaware law should take into account the depository level of ownership by treating DTC participants as record holders for purposes of Delaware law, just as they are for purposes of federal law, and just as they were before the federal mandate. See Dell Ownership, 2015 Del. Ch. LEXIS 184, 2015 WL 4313206, at *11-25 (recommending that Delaware law should take into account the federally imposed level of depository ownership by treating DTC participants as stockholders of record under the appraisal statute); Kurz v. Holbrook, 989 A.2d 140, 165-75 (Del. Ch. 2010) (holding that DTC participants were stockholders of record for purposes of stock list, obviating need for DTC omnibus proxy), rev'd in pertinent part sub nom., Crown EMAK P'rs, LLC v. Kurz, 992 A.2d 377, 398 (Del. 2010) (deeming holding to be "obiter dictum" and "without precedential effect"). BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Founder Starcoin is a San Diego, California-based company that focuses its business in the "cryptocollectibles" market. ("Compl.," ECF No. 1, ¶¶ 1, 6.) Cryptocollectibles are unique, digital assets created using blockchain technology.3Link to the text of the note (Id.) [*2]  Defendant Launch Labs, doing business as Axiom Zen, is a Canada corporation that also conducts business in the cryptocollectible market. (Id. ¶¶ 2, 8.) In August 2017, Defendant began developing "CryptoKitties, a game built on the Ethereum blockchain that allows users to securely buy, sell, trade, and breed genetically unique virtual cats." (Opp'n 8 (citing Declaration of Jody Rebak ("Rebak Decl."), ECF No. 21-2, ¶ 4).)4Link to the text of the note In the months after the initial development, Defendant pursued the idea of associating with celebrities and sports stars to develop "Kitties" with the celebrities' likeness. (Id. at 9 (citing Rebak Decl. ¶ 5).)

Along those lines, on October 20, 2017, Axiom publicly disclosed its plan to match celebrities [*3]  to CryptoKitties. Defendant's product manager was quoted in a Vice.com news article as saying:

"Kitties should be a part of this revolution of bringing blockchain technology to the masses . . . So many great companies are building awesome technology that the world won't care about or understand. We're the flag bearer for the rest of this ecosystem in terms of getting celebrities to associate with kitties and the Ethereum network."

(Rebak Decl. ¶ 7 (quoting Ex. 7, ECF No. 22-5, at 3).) Between October 2017 and February 2018, Defendant began discussions with a few celebrities to license their likeness on CryptoKitties.5Link to the text of the note (See Opp'n 10.)
On November 28, 2017, Defendant launched CryptoKitties and within a month approximately 180,000 individuals signed up for the game and brought in $20 million in revenue to Defendant. (Id. at 11 (citing Declaration of Mack Flavelle, ("Flavelle Decl."), ECF No. 21-4, ¶¶ 6, 8).) Between November 2017 and January 2018, various investors, including CAA Ventures, Digital Currency Group, Mark Pincus, and Andreessen Horowitz, contacted Defendant regarding investment opportunities in Axiom. (Id. (citing Rebak Decl. ¶ 9).) Those investors ultimately decided to fund Axiom; specifically, [*4]  Andressen Horowitz and Digital Currency Group committed on January 18, 2018 and February 7, 2018, respectively. Mark Pincus verbally committed in January 2018 and signed with Defendant in March 2018. (Id. (citing Rebak Decl. ¶ 9).) On February 2, 2018, Axiom spun off the CryptoKitties game into a new company, Dapper Labs, Inc. (Id. at 12 (citing Rebak Decl. ¶ 10).) Dapper Labs received the rights to CryptoKitties and twenty employees from Axiom. (Id. (citing Rebak Decl. ¶¶ 12-13).) Axiom received a majority holding in Dapper Labs. (Id.)

Previously, on January 3, 2018, Tyler Breton, the Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") and co-founder of third-party Makemoji, contacted Axiom's Chief Operating Officer ("COO") Mack Flavelle about the possibility of celebrity partnerships. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 21, ECF No. 21-10, at 2.) Mr. Flavelle met with Mr. Breton and one of Mr. Breton's colleagues, Mr. Ray Lee, on February 7, 2018 to discuss celebrity partnerships and Mr. Breton followed up by email on February 13, 2018. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 6, ECF No. 21-7, at 2.) Mr. Lee likewise emailed on February 13, 2018 to discuss his celebrity contacts. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 22, ECF No. 21-11, at 2.) By [*5]  phone, Mr. Lee introduced Mr. Flavelle to Oliver Camilo, CEO of third-party Appmoji. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12.) It was Mr. Flavelle's understanding that NBA star Stephen Curry was an investor in Appmoji and that Appmoji had rights to Mr. Curry's likeness. (Id.) Sometime thereafter, Dapper Labs began negotiating with Appmoji concerning a CryptoKitty featuring Mr. Curry's likeness. (Id.)

On February 8, 2018, Plaintiff's CEO Jevon Feinblatt emailed an employee at Axiom in search of a business partnership with Axiom and stated that Plaintiff was "developing a unique solution for the entertainment industry." (Id. (quoting Rebak Decl. ¶ 15); Ex. 8, ECF No. 22-6, at 7.) Jody Rebak, Axiom's Chief of Staff, responded requesting additional information from Mr. Feinblatt. (MTN 7; Ex. 8, at 7.) Mr. Feinblatt then requested a mutual non-disclosure agreement ("MNDA"), which Ms. Rebak sent and Mr. Feinblatt signed on February 9, 2018. (Opp'n 12 (citing Rebak Decl. ¶ 17); MTN 5.) The MNDA defined "Confidential Information" generally as "any nonpublic 'information, technical data or know-how.'" (MTN 8 (quoting Ex. A, ECF No. 1-2, at 2).) The MNDA further prohibited the parties from using any such Confidential [*6]  Information. (Id.) The same day, Mr. Feinblatt sent a slide deck depicting and describing Plaintiff's business model.6Link to the text of the note (Rebak Decl. ¶ 17.) In the email accompanying the slide deck, Mr. Feinblatt stated, "[w]e would like to collaborate with Axiomzen on ideation and development. We are thinking of starting with releasing digital content from entertainers first then creating the ownership and speculative token aspect later." (Ex. A, at 10.)

Plaintiff's slide deck described its business as a method for celebrities to "commoditize themselves, fund their projects, and create a new type of asset via the first security complaint token platform for entertainers." (Ex. 9, ECF No. 21-8, at 3.) Plaintiff's product was to allow entertainers to "commoditize themselves . . . by launching a regulated token." (Id. at 5.) Businesses representing those entertainers could fund their clients through a "token sale" and could also invest in other company's entertainers. (Id.) Finally, individuals could invest in their favorite entertainers by purchasing a token and profit from the entertainer's successes. (Id.) Plaintiff would create the tokens, host the tokens on its "regulated exchange," and vet entertainers to [*7]  insure the value rose for investors. (Id. at 6.) Plaintiff would generate income by taking a "percentage of capital raised from each token offering" and take a transaction fee for any trading of tokens on Plaintiff's exchange. (Id. at 7.) Plaintiff's slide deck disclosed its plan to develop its platform in April 2018 and perform beta tests by June 2018.7Link to the text of the note (Id. at 11.)

On February 13, 2018, Mr. Feinblatt followed up via email and sent an additional slide to Ms. Rebak, which depicted a mock-up of Plaintiff's mobile phone-based concept. (Ex. 10, ECF No. 21-9, at 2.) Mr. Feinblatt's email explained, "[t]he slide contains a sample of our current concept, although we have many different models, ideas for content, and the general [user experience] we're currently discussing." (Id.) Notably, the additional mock-up contained stock images of Stephen Curry, Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson, and players from the Las Vegas Raiders and LA Kings. (Id.) Plaintiff sent follow up emails to its contacts at Axiom and Axiom responded on February 19, 2018 that it was still reviewing Plaintiff's information and slide deck. (MTN 6.) Plaintiff called Defendant on February 26, 2018 to discuss potential collaboration, but Defendant informed [*8]  Plaintiff via email that Axiom could not discuss the slide deck until "closer to June." (Id. at 10 (citing Ex. A).) The parties had no further contact.

On May 7, 2018, Dapper Labs released three "CurryKitties" based on the likeness of NBA star Stephen Curry. (Opp'n 14 (citing Declaration of Caty Tedman, ECF No. 21-1, ¶ 6).) Dapper Labs later pulled the CurryKitties from its website because it discovered that the parties involved in the licensing transaction did not have rights to Mr. Curry's likeness. (Id. at 10 n.4.) On May 16, 2018, Plaintiff filed a Complaint, (ECF No. 1), and two days later filed the present Motion for Preliminary Injunction based on trade secret misappropriation, (ECF No. 5).



LEGAL STANDARD
A preliminary injunction is an equitable remedy aimed at preserving the status quo and at preventing the occurrence of irreparable harm during the course of litigation. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 65. "A plaintiff seeking a preliminary injunction must establish that he is likely to succeed on the merits, that he is likely to suffer irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief, that the balance of equities tips in his favor, and that an injunction is in the public interest." Winter v. NRDC, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 20, 129 S. Ct. 365, 172 L. Ed. 2d 249 (2008) (citing, e.g., Munaf v. Geren, 553 U.S. 674, 689-90, 128 S. Ct. 2207, 171 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2008)); see also Am. Trucking Ass'ns, Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 559 F.3d 1046, 1052 (9th Cir. 2009).

A preliminary [*9]  injunction is an "extraordinary remedy that may only be awarded upon a clear showing that the plaintiff is entitled to such relief." Winter, 555 U.S. at 22. This "clear showing" requires the plaintiff to show more than a mere "possibility" of irreparable harm; instead, he must "demonstrate that irreparable injury is likely in the absence of an injunction." Id.; Am. Trucking, 559 F.3d at 1052. A district court may consider evidence, including hearsay statements, in deciding to whether to issue a preliminary injunction. Johnson v. Couturier, 572 F.3d 1067, 1083 (9th Cir. 2009) (citing Republic of the Philippines v. Marcos, 862 F.2d 1355, 1363 (9th Cir. 1988) (en banc); and Flynt Distrib. Co. v. Harvey, 734 F.2d 1389, 1394 (9th Cir. 1984)).

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65(d) requires that every order granting an injunction must "state the reasons why it issued; state its terms specifically; and describe in reasonable detail—and not by referring to the complaint or other document—the act or acts restrained or required." "This mandate for specificity ensures that those against whom an injunction is drawn receive fair and precise notice of what conduct is prohibited." Halo Mgmt., LLC v. Interland, Inc., 308 F. Supp. 2d 1019, 1027 (N.D. Cal. 2003) (citing Union Pac. R.R. v. Mower, 219 F.3d 1069, 1077 (9th Cir. 2000)). Rule 65 also requires the movant to give security in an amount that the Court considers proper to pay the costs and damages sustained by any party found to have been wrongfully enjoined or restrained. Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(c).



ANALYSIS

I. Likelihood of Success on the Merits
Plaintiff brings its trade secret misappropriation [*10]  claim under the federal Defend Trade Secrets Act ("DTSA"), 18 U.S.C. § 1836 et seq. (Compl. ¶¶ 25-35.) 18 U.S.C. § 1836(b)(3)(A) permits district courts to enter injunctions to prevent any actual or threatened misappropriation occurring after May 11, 2016, see Pub. L. No. 114-153, § 2, 130 Stat. 376, 381-82; Vendavo, Inc. v. Price f(x) AG, No. 17-CV-6930-RS, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 48637, 2018 WL 1456697, at *3 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 23, 2018). As other district courts in this circuit have recognized, the definitions of trade secret and misappropriation are virtually the same in both the federal DTSA, 18 U.S.C. § 1839, and the California Uniform Trade Secrets Act, Cal. Civ. Code § 3426.1. See Waymo LLC v. Uber Techs., Inc., No. C 17-939 WHA, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 73843, 2017 WL 2123560, at *7 (N.D. Cal. May 15, 2017); Elinor Shapiro v. Hasbro, Inc., No. CV 16-5750-BRO (AJWx), 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194684, 2016 WL 9024810, at *7 (C.D. Cal. Aug. 15, 2016). Accordingly, federal district courts in California have applied California's trade secret case law to causes of action brought under the federal DTSA. See Vendavo, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 48637, 2018 WL 1456697, at *3 ("The elements of a trade secret misappropriation claim under the DTSA are substantially similar to those under older state statutes.").

A prima facie claim for misappropriation of trade secrets under the California Uniform Trade Secrets Act, Cal. Civ. Code § 3426 et seq., requires: "(1) the plaintiff owned a trade secret, (2) the defendant acquired, disclosed, or used the plaintiff's trade secret through improper means, and (3) the defendant's actions damaged the plaintiff." [*11]  Cytodyn, Inc. v. Amerimmune Pharm., Inc., 160 Cal. App. 4th 288, 297, 72 Cal. Rptr. 3d 600 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008) (quoting Sargent Fletcher, Inc. v. Able Corp., 110 Cal. App. 4th 1658, 1665, 3 Cal. Rptr. 3d 279 (Cal. Ct. App. 2003)).



A. Whether Plaintiff Owned a Trade Secret
Plaintiff argues that in February 2018 it provided Defendant "valuable, confidential, trade secret information . . . concerning licensing digital collectibles based on athletes, entertainers and celebrities that Axiom did not have, and was not then developing." (MTN 15 (footnote omitted).) Plaintiff further contends that Defendant never stated to Plaintiff that Axiom was developing anything related to digital collectibles for celebrities or athletes. (Id. at 16.) Plaintiff concludes that Defendant's lack of statements to Plaintiff concerning development of digital collectibles means that Plaintiff's "business plan development was significantly ahead of Axiom's in these particular areas at issue." (Id.)

Defendant responds that Plaintiff's alleged trade secrets are in the public domain and information that is public knowledge cannot be a trade secret. (Opp'n 18 (citing Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986, 1002, 104 S. Ct. 2862, 81 L. Ed. 2d 815 (1984)).) Defendant characterizes Plaintiff's purported trade secret as nothing more than using celebrities to sell products, which has been around since well before 2018. (Id.) Defendant also points out that even if Plaintiff had a protectable trade secret then Plaintiff has not overcome [*12]  the fact that Defendant, not Plaintiff, developed its products first. Defendant asserts that by February 2018, it had both an existing product and well-advanced, public plans to associate that product with celebrities and athletes. (Id. at 21-22.) According to Defendant, Plaintiff only had a high-level general concept and no specific product. (Id.)

Next, Defendant distinguishes Plaintiff's purported trade secret from Defendant's actual product. According to Defendant, Plaintiff's slide deck reveals that its trade secret was to use a blockchain-based and mobile-based asset to invest in a celebrity. (Id.) Defendant points out that this idea is well-known in the "crypto-space." (Id.) Moreover, Axiom's model is entirely different because celebrities license with Axiom to create a web-based collectible that users can buy, sell, and trade. (Id.)

Plaintiff responds that Defendant mischaracterizes Plaintiff's trade secrets and business model. (Reply 2.) Plaintiff argues that it is not claiming a secret in "tokenizing" celebrities or working with them to advertise a digital product. (Id. at 3.) Instead, Plaintiff's trade secret, licensing the likeness of a celebrity for a digital collectible, was not known or used [*13]  in the blockchain industry. (Id.) Plaintiff points out that what is generally well-known in one industry can be a trade secret in a different industry. (Id. (citing Beacon Wireless Solutions, Inc. v. Garmin Int'l, Inc., 894 F. Supp. 2d 727, 731 (W.D. Va. 2012)).) Plaintiff argues that Defendant "essentially admits" that licensing the likeness of a celebrity for a digital collectible was not known in the particular industry because Defendant touted the CurryKitty as "the world's first officially licensed sports crypotcollectible." (Id.)

At oral argument, Plaintiff advanced a new argument and pointed to Mr. Feinblatt's email, accompanying the slide deck, stating "[w]e are thinking of starting with releasing digital content from entertainers first then creating the ownership and speculative token aspect later." (Ex. A, at 10.) And, the slide deck states "[t]okens provide ownership and access to exclusive digital and real world content." (Ex. C, at 6.) The slide deck also discloses, "[w]e take a transaction fee from trading tokens and digital content on our exchange." (Id. at 7.) Plaintiff argues that, taken together, these references to "digital content" encompasses digital collectibles. ("Transcript," ECF No. 31, at 39-40.) Defendant responded at oral argument that the term "digital content" [*14]  is so broad that it could encompass anything. (Id. at 46.)

The DTSA defines "trade secret" as:

[A]ll forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if—

(A) the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and

(B) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information.

18 U.S.C. § 1839(3); see Cal. Civ. Code § 3426.1(d). A plaintiff seeking relief for misappropriation of trade secrets "must identify the trade secrets and carry the burden of showing that they exist." MAI Sys. Corp. v. Peak Computer, Inc., 991 F.2d 511, 522 (9th Cir. 1993) (citing Diodes, Inc. v. Franzen, 260 Cal. App. 2d 244, 250-52, 67 Cal. Rptr. 19 (1968)). Generally, the plaintiff must "describe the subject matter of the trade secret with sufficient particularity to separate it from matters of general knowledge in the trade or of [*15]  special persons who are skilled in the trade, and to permit the defendant to ascertain at least the boundaries within which the secret lies." Pellerin v. Honeywell Int'l, Inc., 877 F. Supp. 2d 983, 988 (S.D. Cal. 2012) (quoting Diodes, 260 Cal. App. 2d at 253); see Imax Corp. v. Cinema Techs., Inc., 152 F.3d 1161, 1164-65 (9th Cir. 1998) (citing Universal Analytics v. MacNeal-Schwendler Corp., 707 F. Supp. 1170, 1177 (C.D. Cal. 1989)).
Here, Plaintiff's purported trade secret suffers from a lack of "sufficient particularity" that might separate it from matters of general knowledge. It is difficult to pin down what exactly constitutes Plaintiff's trade secret. The slide deck takes one position. In the slide deck, Plaintiff purports to claim a method for celebrities to "commoditize themselves, fund their projects, and create a new type of asset via the first security compliant token platform for entertainers." (Ex. 9, at 3.) Plaintiff's product would allow entertainers to "commoditize themselves . . . by launching a regulated token." (Id. at 5.) Alternatively, in its moving papers and at oral argument, Plaintiff characterizes its trade secret as "licensing digital collectibles based on athletes, entertainers and celebrities." (MTN 15; Reply 3.) Is the trade secret a licensing scheme for digital collectibles or is it a method to commoditize and invest in celebrities? The Court need not determine which definition controls because, as will be seen, neither argument [*16]  prevails.

Assuming for the sake of argument that Plaintiff's trade secret is celebrity licensing of digital collectibles, then as Defendant points out, the Supreme Court has cited with approval the general proposition that "[i]nformation that is public knowledge or that is generally known in an industry cannot be a trade secret." Ruckelshaus, 467 U.S. at 1002 (citation omitted); accord Self Directed Placement Corp. v. Control Data Corp., 908 F.2d 462, 465-66 (9th Cir. 1990); see also 18 U.S.C. § 1839(3)(B) ("[T]he information derives independent economic value . . . from not being generally known to . . . another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information."). Licensing a celebrity's likeness to promote products sales is a well-known business concept. See, e.g., Boldface Licensing + Branding v. By Lee Tillett, Inc., 940 F. Supp. 2d 1178, 1181 (C.D. Cal. 2013) (discussing trademarks involving cosmetics line affiliated with "the celebrity Kardashian sisters—Kourtney, Kim, and Khloe"); see also Morgan v. Apple Inc., No. 17-cv-5277-RS, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 82836, 2018 WL 2234537, at *1-2 (N.D. Cal. May 16, 2018) (discussing "wireless Bluetooth headphones co-created by athlete LeBron James" and commercials featuring LeBron James using the headphones). Thus, celebrity licensing cannot, by itself, be a trade secret.

Plaintiff, however, is adamant that its trade secret is not simply licensing celebrities. (Reply 3.) Rather, the trade secret is [*17]  "licensing the likeness of a celebrity for a digital collectible." (Id.) Plaintiff contends that "[n]owhere does Axiom Zen disclose working with celebrities to create personalized and licensed digital content." (Id. at 4 (emphasis omitted).) The same is true, however, of Plaintiff. Nowhere in the slide deck that Mr. Feinblatt sent to Axiom does Plaintiff disclose that it sought to work with celebrities to license a digital collectible. Nor does the follow up email sent by Mr. Feinblatt and containing the stock image of Mr. Curry contain any explicit reference to working with celebrities to license their likeness. Mr. Feinblatt's email states "[t]he slide contains a sample of our current concept, although we have many different models, ideas for content, and the general [user experience] we're currently discussing." (Ex. 10, at 2.) This statement belies a broad range of potential concepts, not a hard and fast trade secret that Defendant could appropriate. Plaintiff's purported trade secret lacks sufficient particularity that might allow Defendant to ascertain the boundaries of the trade secret. See Pellerin, 877 F. Supp. 2d at 988.

Plaintiff also argues that what is generally known in one industry can be a trade secret when [*18]  applied to a new industry. (Reply 3 (citing Beacon Wireless Solutions, 894 F. Supp. 2d at 731).) Even if the Court were to arrive at a similar conclusion, Plaintiff does not take the next step to explain how its business concept or trade secret meets the very proposition Plaintiff proposes. Instead, Plaintiff points to a statement made by Defendant when it released the "Currykitty" disclosing that the Currykitty was "the world's first officially licensed sports cryptocollectible." (Id.) Simply because Defendant claimed it was the first to monetize or use the concept does not make it also true that such an idea was a trade secret. Marrying the concept of celebrity licensing with blockchain technology appears, on its face, to be unremarkable, obvious, and general knowledge. Nearly every industry attempts to gain celebrity endorsements for products. While the Court does not discount that there could be a trade secret embedded in this general idea, the Court finds that Plaintiff has not carried its burden to explain how its trade secret is unique to the blockchain industry.

But, the larger issue is this. Plaintiff's slide deck and follow up email do not support its legal position that Plaintiff's trade secret is licensing celebrities [*19]  in the digital collectible industry. The information sent to Defendant does not readily disclose Plaintiff's business model or trade secret. Instead, the slides disclose a way to commoditize celebrities, by investing and monetizing entertainers' careers, through a token offering. For example, Plaintiff's business model states, "X amount of tokens are allocated to Starcoin. The rest are released to the public to purchase during the token launch and a portion of tokens are allocated to the entertainers, and organizations." (Ex. C, ECF No. 9-5, at 7.) The next slides discloses, "[a] majority of the [Initial Coin Offering] market is unregulated. Our platform launches security compliant tokens to raise capital and invest in additional entertainers when they couldn't before." (Id. at 8.) A plain reading of Plaintiff's slide deck is that it intended to create a platform for token offerings in celebrities, not licensing digital collectibles.

The Court accepts the implicit idea that Plaintiff would likely need to sign a license with a celebrity to execute its business model. Yet, such a recognition does not overcome the observation that nowhere in the slide deck or follow up email does Plaintiff disclose [*20]  that it was pursuing a "collectible" in the same sense that Defendant's product is a unique "collectible." The natural reading of Plaintiff's trade secret is that it hoped to use a fungible asset, cryptocurrency, to commoditize unique celebrities. Defendant's product is a unique collectible (each CryptoKitty is unique) and celebrity's likeness would help sell the unique asset. These two ideas are not equivalent. At bottom, Plaintiff's legal position simply does not support the information sent to Defendant.

If Plaintiff's purported trade secret is the concept actually described in the slide deck sent to Defendant, then it too is generally known in the blockchain industry. As previously stated, the slide deck purports to solve the problem of commoditizing entertainers through token offerings. (Ex. 9, at 3, 5.) Defendant points the Court to several publications or online posts expressing that exact same idea as Plaintiff, i.e., offering an investment opportunity in celebrities and athletes through an initial coin offering or a token offering. (Opp'n 16 (citing Exs. 11-14).) A November 2017 article published on Business Insider.com is particularly noteworthy. It discusses how artists can [*21]  raise money through token launches and states: "Tokens are the native crypto-assets of a blockchain app. They are powered by smart contracts (code-based financial agreements) that are programmed into Ethereum. When an artist tokenizes, they're turning their intellectual property (IP) into a financial asset, so an artist's token reflects the value of their creative output." (Ex. 14, at 2.) It is difficult to imagine a more on-point public disclosure of Plaintiff's slide deck and business model. Because Plaintiff's idea is publicly known, it cannot be a trade secret.

At oral argument, Plaintiff pointed to references by Mr. Feinblatt to "digital content" in his email and in the slide deck encompass digital collectibles. (See Transcript 39-40.) The Court finds this argument unpersuasive. Digital content could encompass virtually anything produced or created with reference to a digital, as opposed to analog, environment. That broad phrase could not have put Defendant on notice that it claimed a secret in the same digital collectible as Defendant's.

In sum, Plaintiff has the burden of establishing it had a valid trade secret. MAI Sys., 991 F.2d at 522. Plaintiff characterizes its trade secret as "licensing digital [*22]  collectibles based on athletes, entertainers and celebrities." (MTN 15; Reply 3.) The evidence does not support such a characterization. Plaintiff's trade secret appears to be commoditizing entertainers through blockchain and cryptocurreny. This idea is not new and is general knowledge. Yet, even if Plaintiff's trade secret is licensing digital collectibles then Plaintiff has not carried its burden to show that such an idea is a trade secret. Celebrity licensing is generally known and Plaintiff has not demonstrated how marrying this idea with the blockchain industry is a secret. The Court finds that Plaintiff has not carried its burden to establish that it had a valid trade secret. It follows that Plaintiff has not established a likelihood of success on the merits concerning the first element of a trade secret misappropriation claim.



B. Whether Defendant Acquired, Disclosed or Used Plaintiff's Trade Secret
Next, the Court considers whether, assuming Plaintiff could show a likelihood of success in demonstrating a trade secret, Defendant acquired, disclosed, or used that trade secret. Plaintiff contends that it is highly likely that Defendant used Plaintiff's confidential information. [*23]  (MTN 16.) Specifically, Plaintiff argues that Defendant signed the very same athlete, Stephen Curry, as was depicted in a mock-up emailed to Defendant and Defendant launched a CryptoKitty with Stephen Curry's likeness. (Id.) Using the CryptoKitty, Defendant then obtained funding through two venture capital sources that were poised to fund Plaintiff rather than Defendant. (Id.) Plaintiff concludes that "[i]t is likely that Axiom did not have these design or business ideas before they were demonstrated to them by Starcoin in February 2018." (Id.)

Defendant counters that it independently developed the idea to associate celebrities with CryptoKitties. (Opp'n 22.) To that end, Defendant points out that it publicly pursued plans to associate with athletes and celebrities before Plaintiff reached out to Defendant. (Id.) Defendant cites cases where courts have denied preliminary injunctions when evidence existed to support an independent creation of an idea. (Id. at 22-23 (citing Shapiro, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193658, 2016 WL 9176559, at *10; and Best Lockers, LLC v. Am. Locker Grp., Inc, No. SACV-12-403, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199973, 2012 WL 12845107, at *2 (C.D. Cal. Mar. 30, 2012)).) Defendant would apply similar reasoning here.

Plaintiff responds that the public communications between Defendant and celebrities, as well as the private communications [*24]  disclosed during this litigation, demonstrate that Defendant did not explicitly discuss licensing the likeness of any celebrity or creating any kind of licensed digital content. (Reply 4.) For example, Defendant reached out to Olympic athlete Charmaine Crooks. Plaintiff points out that Defendant only discusses the idea of fostering a cat, which Plaintiff defines as "simply designing the general look of a Fancy Cryptokitty." (Id.) Plaintiff supports its definition of "fostering" by citing two Medium articles, including one written by Mack Flavelle, generally describing fostering—neither article discusses licensing celebrity likenesses. (Id. (citing Ex. 20, ECF No. 22-16, at 2; Ex. F, ECF No. 28-2).) Because Defendant does not explicitly reference licensing in its discussions with celebrities, Plaintiff would distinguish the Defendant's evidence demonstrating how Defendant independently arrived at the concept of celebrity licensing.

California's "UTSA does not prevent a person from using independently developed or properly obtained trade secret information already in the possession of another." Mattel, Inc. v. MGA Entm't, Inc., 782 F. Supp. 2d 911, 963 (C.D. Cal. 2011) (citing Cal. Civ. Code § 3426.1(a); and Composite Marine Propellers, Inc. v. Van Der Woude, 962 F.2d 1263, 1265-66 (7th Cir. 1992); and E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co. v. United States, 288 F.2d 904, 911, 153 Ct. Cl. 274 (Ct. Cl. 1961)). Likewise, the federal DTSA defines trade secret as "information deriv[ing] [*25]  independent economic value . . . from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information." 18 U.S.C. § 1839(3)(B).

The evidence demonstrates that Defendant, not Plaintiff, developed the idea to license digital collectibles using the likeness of celebrities first. At the outset, the Court notes that Defendant Axiom launched its product in November 2017. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 6.) To date, Plaintiff has not demonstrated it even has a product, much less what constitutes its product. This would not be fatal had Plaintiff developed its idea before Defendant and, in turn, Defendant relied on Plaintiff's idea.

Yet, as early as October 2017, Defendant was developing the idea to associate celebrities with CryptoKitties. This was not even a secret because Defendant publicly disclosed its plan on October 20, 2017. (Rebak Decl. ¶ 7; Ex. 7.) The same day, Defendant took concrete steps to actualize the plan by corresponding with Olympic athlete Charmaine Crooks. (Rebak Decl. ¶ 6.) Defendant continued to reach out to entertainers in late 2017. (Id. ¶ 8; Ex. 4.) In December 2017, a representative [*26]  of the L.A. Clippers messaged to Defendant via LinkedIn to begin discussions about a potential agreement. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 8; Ex. 5.) Most importantly, the discussions between Mr. Flavelle and Mr. Breton that ultimately led to Defendant using Mr. Curry's likeness began January 3, 2018—one month before Plaintiff's CEO contacted Defendant. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 21.) And, Mr. Flavelle followed up on the initial contact on February 6, 2018—two days before Mr. Feinblatt contacted Defendant.8Link to the text of the note (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 6.) The sequence of events directly rebuts Plaintiff's argument that it was "likely that Axiom did not have these design or business ideas before they were demonstrated to them by Starcoin in February 2018." (MTN 16.) The evidence demonstrates that Defendant arrived at the very idea Plaintiff purports to assert well before February 2018.

Plaintiff's arguments to the contrary are unavailing. Plaintiff argues that Defendant's negotiations with celebrities, such as rapper Lil B and athlete Charmaine Crooks, do not explicitly discuss licensing their likenesses. (Reply 4.) This is a true statement. The email chain between Defendant's co-founder and Ms. Crooks does not explicitly [*27]  discuss licensing. (Ex. 3, at 2-4.) Nor does the solicitation from the Clippers' representative discuss licensing. (Ex. 5, at 2.) It does not follow, however, that a licensing agreement is precluded simply because none of the evidence discloses, explicitly, a licensing agreement. Considering the evidence put forward by Defendant, Axiom arrived at the idea of licensing celebrities for digital collectibles before any disclosures by Plaintiff.

Next, Plaintiff contends that the idea for licensing Mr. Curry's likeness is somehow tainted by the method by which the negotiation between Mr. Flavelle and Appmoji and Makemoji unfolded. (Reply 5.) Plaintiff points out that during the negotiation to license Mr. Curry, Defendant never required Appmoji to perform due diligence or determine whether Appmoji actually had the rights to license Mr. Curry's likeness. (Id.) Plaintiff finds it strange that Defendant would not ensure that Appmoji had the rights to Mr. Curry's likeness. (Id.) Plaintiff also points out that none of the exhibits concerning Mr. Curry explicitly discuss licensing. (Id. at 5-6.) For example, the email sent from Mr. Breton to Mr. Flavelle only mentions coming up with an "actionable plan." [*28]  (Id. at 6 (quoting Ex. 6, at 2).)

There is no doubt that Appmoji's lack of right to use Mr. Curry's likeness casts a shadow on Defendant's business development. Yet, Plaintiff's argument does not speak to the precise issue at hand. Did Defendant arrive at the idea to license with celebrities, specifically Mr. Curry, before Plaintiff gave Defendant its slide deck? Defects in the end result do not disprove the genesis of the idea occurred before February 9, 2018 (or February 13, 2018 when Plaintiff sent the mock up with Mr. Curry). The fact that Mr. Flavelle began discussing celebrity partnerships with Mr. Breton on January 3, 2018 is persuasive. (See Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12; Ex. 21.) That discussion led to a chain of events that resulted in an agreement, though flawed, to license Mr. Curry's likeness.

Plaintiff's second argument—that none of the exhibits explicitly reference a licensing agreement for Mr. Curry—has greater purchase. The communications Defendant points to are vague and do not explicitly reference a licensing agreement. As Plaintiff points out, "[t]hese vague discussions do not amount to solid, well-thought out and novel business plans." (Reply 6.) The same could be said of Plaintiff's [*29]  own business plan. Nowhere in Plaintiff's materials sent to Defendant does Plaintiff state that it will license celebrities. The reader of Plaintiff's materials must infer that a license agreement will inexorably result from its business concept. If the Court must apply such an inference to Defendant's communications, it does the same to Plaintiff's material. Plaintiff would have the Court ignore the fact the communications between Mr. Flavelle, Mr. Breton, and Mr. Lee actually resulted in a licensing agreement and instead focus on vague discussion leading up to the agreement. The fact that Defendant's employees began discussions that actually resulted in the CryptoCurry overcomes the lack of reference to licensing agreements in either party's communications.

Next, Plaintiff points out that two investors, CAA Ventures and Digital Currency Group, that had previously expressed interest in Plaintiff have now funded Defendant. (Id. at 11, 16.) Plaintiff contends that this fact supports its argument that Defendant misappropriated Plaintiff's trade secret. (Id. at 16.) Once again, the sequence of events contradicts Plaintiff's interpretation. Defendant states that the two venture capitalists supposedly interested [*30]  in Plaintiff were already in discussion with Defendant as early as November 2017. (See Opp'n 11.) Plaintiff does not address this fact in its Reply brief. Rather, the facts demonstrate that Defendant independently arrived at its funding before Plaintiff sent its slide deck in February 2018, which undercuts Plaintiff's argument that a misappropriation occurred.

Finally, Plaintiff cites two district court cases where courts granted preliminary injunctions based on misappropriated trade secrets. (MTN 13 (citing Hunter Consulting, Inc. v. Beas, No. SACV 12-1947, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176317, 2012 WL 6193381, at *3 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 10, 2012); and Pixon Imaging, Inc. v. Empower Techs. Corp., No. 11-CV-1093, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 94741, 2011 WL 3739529, at *3 (S.D. Cal. Aug. 24, 2011)).) In Hunter Consulting, the plaintiff owned proprietary information including "its customer lists pricing information, vendor and collaborator contact information, and proprietary software programs for managing the information." 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176317, 2012 WL 6193381, at *3. Like here, the plaintiff signed a nondisclosure agreement and the defendants used the proprietary information in breach of the nondisclosure agreement. 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176317, [WL] at *4. In Pixon Imaging, the plaintiff signed a nondisclosure agreement and disclosed its proprietary software to the defendant in preparation for an acquisition bid. 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 94741, 2011 WL 3739529, at *1. A year after the acquisition fell through, the defendant began using new software [*31]  that "specifically incorporate[d] proprietary information obtained from" the plaintiff. 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 94741, [WL] at *2. In both cases, the court enjoined the respective defendant. Plaintiff contends that "Starcoin's likely success on the merits of its trade secret misappropriation claim is as strong (or stronger) than the likely success identified in the analogous Hunter Consulting and Pixon Imaging cases." (MTN 16-17.)

Both cases are distinguishable and Plaintiff's claim is decidedly weaker than those opinions. In both Pixon Imagining and Hunter Consulting, the respective plaintiffs had proprietary information they transmitted to the defendants. Here, Plaintiff's purported trade secrets are not defined with the same level of specificity as those cases. See supra section I.A. More importantly, the defendant in both cases did not have the proprietary information before the plaintiffs dispatched such information. Axiom has demonstrated how it arrived at its concept (and publicly disclosed its concept) before Plaintiff ever reached out to Defendant.9Link to the text of the note

In sum, the Court finds that Plaintiff has not established its likelihood of success on the second element for a trade secret misappropriation claim. [*32]  Because Defendant arrived at its business model independent from and before receiving Plaintiff's slide deck, Defendant could not have appropriated Plaintiff's trade secrets. See Mattel, 782 F. Supp. 2d at 963.



C. Whether Axiom Caused Damage to Starcoin
The Court addresses the third element of a trade secret misappropriation claim. Defendant states it was not Axiom that released the CryptoKitty with Steph Curry's likeness but rather its subsidiary, Dapper Labs. (Opp'n 23.) Moreover, the fact that it was Dapper Labs, not Axiom, behind the release was public knowledge. (Id. (citing Exs. 18-19).) Defendant cites the general rule that a parent corporation cannot be "held liable on the basis of its subsidiary's actions." (Id. (quoting Sun Microsystems Inc. v. Hynix Semiconductor Inc., 622 F. Supp. 2d 890, 897 (N.D. Cal. 2009)).) Defendant argues that Plaintiff has presented no evidence to ignore the separate corporate identities and, therefore, no likelihood of success on the merits exists. (Id. at 24.)

Plaintiff responds that it signed the MNDA with Axiom and sent its confidential information to Axiom, not Dapper Labs. (Reply 6.) It further argues that the misappropriation is not the creation of the Currykitty by Dapper Labs, but the misuse of Plaintiff's trade secrets by Axiom. (Id. at 6-7.) Plaintiff concludes by arguing that [*33]  the misuse of trade secrets can be remedied by a preliminary injunction against Axiom. (Id. at 7.)

The Court agrees, to an extent, with Plaintiff. It was Axiom, not Dapper Labs, that received the trade secrets and Axiom that allegedly misappropriated the trade secrets. The Court departs from Plaintiff's reasoning with regard to its conclusion. The issue here is causation. To prevail on a trade secret misappropriation claim, Plaintiff must demonstrate that Defendant's actions damaged Plaintiff. Cytodyn, 160 Cal. App. 4th at 297. Was it Axiom that allegedly harmed Plaintiff or was it Dapper Labs? While it may have been Axiom that received Plaintiff's trade secrets, it was Dapper Labs that caused the harm by releasing the CryptoCurry. Indeed, Plaintiff acknowledges that the harm derives from the public disclosure of its trade secret. Plaintiff submitted a declaration stating in pertinent part, "any non-confidential disclosure or publication of one or more of Starcoin's trade secrets could drastically reduce the value of Starcoin's business." (Declaration of Randal Koene, ECF No. 5-7, ¶ 3.) But for the public release of CryptoCurry, there is no exposure of Plaintiff's purported trade secret and no harm to Plaintiff. Dapper Labs [*34]  released the CryptoCurry (and has the rights to all CryptoKitties) and, thus, Dapper Labs caused the harm to Plaintiff.

In light of the foregoing, the Court finds that Plaintiff has not demonstrated the likelihood of success on the merits for any of the three elements for a misappropriation of trade secret claim.



II. Irreparable Injury
A preliminary injunction plaintiff must demonstrate that "irreparable injury is likely in the absence of an injunction." Winter, 555 U.S. at 22. "[A]n intention to make imminent or continued use of a trade secret or to disclose it to a competitor will almost always . . . show irreparable harm." Pac. Aerospace & Elecs., Inc. v. Taylor, 295 F. Supp. 2d 1188, 1198 (E.D. Wash. 2003) (first alteration in original) (quoting Campbell Soup Co. v. ConAgra, Inc., 977 F.2d 86, 92-93 (3d Cir. 1992); and citing N. Atl. Instruments, Inc. v. Haber, 188 F.3d 38, 49 (2d Cir. 1999)). "Evidence of threatened loss of prospective customers or goodwill certainly supports a finding of the possibility of irreparable harm." Stuhlbarg Int'l Sales, 240 F.3d at 841 (citation omitted).

Plaintiff cites the proposition that "'[e]vidence of loss of control over business reputation and damage to goodwill' is sufficient to establish irreparable harm." (MTN 17 (quoting Brian Lichtenberg, LLC v. Alex & Chloe, Inc., No. CV 13-6837 DDP (PJWx), 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 101999, 2014 WL 3698317, at *8 (C.D. Cal. July 25, 2014); and citing, e.g., Stuhlbarg Int'l Sales Co. v. John D. Brush & Co., 240 F.3d 832, 841 (9th Cir. 2001)).) Plaintiff argues that Defendant has already harmed its business reputation and goodwill by preempting "Starcoin's new digital [*35]  collectibles it was about to license and release." (Id. at 18.) Plaintiff's CEO states that Plaintiff can no longer be "first to market" with licensed collectibles and that the market will likely perceive Starcoin not as an innovator but as second to Defendant. (Id. (quoting Feinblatt Decl. ¶ 12).) Plaintiff also points to the fact that some investors have chosen to fund Defendant rather than Plaintiff. (Id.)

Defendant responds by citing the proposition that "[s]peculative injury does not constitute irreparable injury." (Opp'n 24 (quoting Goldie's Bookstore, Inc. v. Superior Court of State of Cal., 739 F.2d 466, 472 (9th Cir. 1984)).) Defendant advances three reasons why Plaintiff's harm is speculative. First, Plaintiff's harm is not "threatened and imminent" because it has no product, no customers, no celebrity partnerships, and no established reputation. (Id. at 25 (citing Lilith Games (Shanghai) Co. v. uCool, Inc., No. 15-CV-01267, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 128619, 2015 WL 5591612, at *10 (N.D. Cal. Sept. 23, 2015)).) According to Defendant, Plaintiff has not presented any evidence demonstrating it was about to or could launch a product.

Second, Defendant points to authority stating where parties "'operate in different segments of the market,' claims of irreparable harm from customer loss are 'speculative at best.'" (Id. (quoting Finjan, Inc. v. Blue Coat Sys., LLC, No. 15-CV-03295, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 162881, 2016 WL 6873541, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Nov. 22, 2016)).) Defendant contends that Plaintiff operates in a different market as Defendant. Defendant's CryptoKitties [*36]  is a web-based, gaming application whereas Plaintiff's slide deck suggests its final product would be an investment mechanism for celebrities. (Id. at 26.)

Third, Defendant states that "a plaintiff must 'proffer specific facts or evidence' supporting irreparable harm to secure injunctive relief." (Id. (quoting Brighton Collectibles, Inc. v. Pedre Watch Co., No. 11-cv-0637, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151023, 2013 WL 5719071, at *4 (S.D. Cal. Oct. 21, 2013)).) Defendant contends that Plaintiff has not put forward any specific numbers demonstrating loss and instead relies on naked assertions about losing its ability to be "first to market." (Id.) Defendant concludes by asserting that the chronology of events demonstrates that Plaintiff could not have been first to market, regardless of its trade secret disclosure to Defendant. (Id. at 26-27.)

Plaintiff counters by pointing out that the cases cited by Defendant for parties operating in different market segments rely on trademark or copyright law. (Reply 7.) In those cases, Plaintiff contends the harm was derived from a released product and repeated infringement. (Id.) According to Plaintiff, the harm in a trade secrets case, like here, occurs when the trade secret is first misappropriated or disclosed because the trade secret loses all [*37]  its value when it is not a secret. (Id.)

The Court begins by noting that Plaintiff has not quantified its injury in any respect. Instead, Plaintiff's CEO states "[w]e have already suffered tremendous loss, and this loss will be an irreparable, total loss if Axiom is not enjoined." (MTN 18.) Generally, intangible injuries, such as lost customers and harm to goodwill, can be enjoined. See Rent-A-Center, Inc. v. Canyon Tele. & Appliance Rental, Inc., 944 F.2d 597, 603 (9th Cir. 1991). The Court accepts the general proposition that if Plaintiff lost customers or goodwill to Defendant then the Court might find irreparable harm. Yet, there is a critical element missing—without any sort of product or service in the marketplace there are no customers or goodwill to lose. Plaintiff has not put forward any evidence that it has lost prospective customers or goodwill or that it imminently will lose either. See Stuhlbarg Int'l Sales, 240 F.3d at 841. As Defendant points out, "speculative injury does not constitute irreparable injury." Goldie's Bookstore, 739 F.2d at 472. Because Plaintiff has not demonstrated that it has a product or that its product will reach market soon then claimed loss in prospective customers or goodwill is too speculative to credit.

Plaintiff's argument that it has lost investors provides more concrete evidence of harm. Yet, Defendant argues [*38]  Plaintiff has provided no support for its contention that investors left Plaintiff for Defendant explicitly because of Defendant's purported misappropriation. (Opp'n 27.) The Court agrees with Defendant. While lost investors represents potential harm, Plaintiff has not offered any proof demonstrating that the loss of investors stems in any respect from the use of its purported trade secret. As Defendant illustrates, those same investors were already in discussion with Defendant before the February 9, 2018 disclosure by Mr. Feinblatt, which militates against inferring that those venture capitalists invested in Defendant because of the trade secret. Moreover, Plaintiff has not established why monetary damages would not remedy any loss in investor capital, which also weighs against the extraordinary remedy of an injunction.

On the other hand, the Court disagrees with Defendant that there is no irreparable injury where the two companies "operate in different segments of the market." Finjan, Inc. v. Blue Coat Sys., LLC, No. 15-CV-3295, 22016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 162881, 2016 WL 6873541, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Nov. 22, 2016). As Plaintiff points out, the cases Defendant cites for this proposition are a patent case, see 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 162881, [WL] at *5-6, a copyright case, Lucasarts Entm't Co. v. Humongous Entm't Co., 815 F. Supp. 332, 337 (N.D. Cal. 1993), and a trademark case, Lindeboom v. Plaster City Digital Post, LLC, No. CV88077 SVW (JTLx), 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 140499, 2009 WL 10670660, at *4 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 29, 2009). The Court [*39]  does not read those cases as controlling in a trade secret case and Defendant does not cite any authority to extend the reasoning of those cases to a trade secret case. If two companies operate in different segments of the market and one discloses the trade secrets of the other then harm could, in theory, still exist. However, given the Court's conclusions—both in this section and in the order—whether Plaintiff and Defendant operate in different segments of the market is not dispositive. And, Plaintiff has not demonstrated that it competes in any segment of the market and the Court cannot undertake a comparison between products in the first instance.

The Court accepts the general proposition that Plaintiff could have been harmed by disclosure of its trade secret. But, that general proposition requires facts to support it, which have not been provided. Therefore, the Court finds that Plaintiff has not proffered sufficient evidence demonstrating its irreparable injury. The Court does not foreclose the possibility that Plaintiff could do so, but where a company does not offer evidence of a product or service then claims of lost customers and goodwill ring hollow.



III. Balance of Equities [*40] 
"In each case, courts 'must balance the competing claims of injury and must consider the effect on each party of the granting or withholding of the requested relief.'" Winter, 555 U.S. at 24 (quoting Amoco Prod. Co. v. Gambell, 480 U.S. 531, 542, 107 S. Ct. 1396, 94 L. Ed. 2d 542 (1987)).

Plaintiff contends that it will suffer severe financial harm if the injunction is denied. (MTN 19-20.) It claims that Defendant has only recently launched its new Stephen Curry CryptoKitty and enjoining Defendant will therefore not outweigh Plaintiff's harm. (Id. at 20.) According to Plaintiff, its harm includes the loss of its leadership position in the market and potential evisceration of its most valuable asset, its trade secrets. (Id.)

Defendant responds that celebrity partnership and licensing is a key component of its business and the requested injunction would end Defendant's prospective partnerships with numerous entertainers. (Opp'n 29 (citing Tedman Decl. ¶ 5).) Defendant contends that if the Court were to grant an injunction it would lose both time and resources dedicated to securing celebrity partnerships as well as potentially damaging its relationship with current and future investors. (Id.) Defendant points out that Plaintiff has not yet entered the market and the absence of an injunction does not impede [*41]  Plaintiff from pursuing the business model Plaintiff put forward in its slide deck. (Id.)

Plaintiff rejoins by contending that a preliminary injunction would not seriously harm Defendant's business model or partnerships. (Reply 7.) Plaintiff points to sales data from CryptoKitties to support its thesis that most of Defendant's sales are "common" CryptoKitties, collectible "Fancy Cats," and "Mewtations." (Id.) Plaintiff distinguishes those products from Defendant's "Exclusive" CryptoKitties, such as the "CurryKitty." Plaintiff contends that "the value of these Cryptokitties lies in their exclusivity, not in any potential partnership or license agreement with a celebrity, athlete, or entertainer." (Id. at 8.) Under this theory, Plaintiff argues its proposed injunction does not prevent Axiom from marketing CryptoKitties. (Id.)

Here, it is difficult to quantify the harm to Plaintiff. The source of the difficulty derives from the broad trade secret Plaintiff claims. Is the trade secret a token offering exchange for entertainers as the slide deck purports to show? Is the trade secret licensing digital collectibles as Plaintiff's moving papers claim? If the answer is the former then enjoining Defendant [*42]  will not impact Plaintiff because the two companies would not operate in the same market. An injunction would harm Defendant greatly because it is currently pursuing celebrity licensing. If Plaintiff's trade secret is, in fact, licensing digital collectibles then it has a better argument that it will be harmed if Defendant is not enjoined.

Plaintiff runs into a separate problem when considering the scope of a potential injunction. At oral argument, Plaintiff clarified the scope of the proposed injunction and requested the Court enjoin Defendant from licensing with celebrities, athletes, entertainers, and musicians. (Transcript 25.) This request is overly broad considering that the basis for Plaintiff's suit derives in large part from the fact that it fortuitously used a stock image of Mr. Curry in its mock up. At most, Plaintiff's mockup supports an injunction against a CryptoCurry, assuming the other elements of a preliminary injunction were met. A second problem arises when considering the proper party for the injunction. The harm to Plaintiff derives from the release of the CryptoCurry and, perhaps, future digital collectibles with celebrity likenesses. The only defendant before [*43]  the Court is Axiom, but Axiom is not the entity that released CryptoCurry. The Court cannot enjoin Axiom from releasing CryptoCurry, nor can it enjoin any other digital collectible because Dapper Labs has the rights to CryptoKitties.

The dispositive fact here is that Plaintiff has not demonstrated it has a product or will have a product ready for release in the near future. On the other hand, Plaintiff's CryptoKitty is currently competing in the marketplace and a restraint on their business would be a greater harm than to Plaintiff.10Link to the text of the note Moreover, Plaintiff has not demonstrated how enjoining Axiom would protect its trade secret when Dapper Labs has the rights in CryptoKitties.

Accordingly, the Court finds the balance of equities tips in Defendant's favor.



IV. Public Interest
"In exercising their sound discretion, courts of equity should pay particular regard for the public consequences in employing the extraordinary remedy of injunction." Winter, 555 U.S. at 24.

Plaintiff characterizes the public interest as a strong interest in protecting trade secrets. (MTN 20-21 (citing, e.g., Hunter Consulting, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176317, 2012 WL 6193381, at *5).) Plaintiff would apply the general rule protecting trade secrets to this case. (Id. at 21.) Defendant responds that Plaintiff cannot cite any [*44]  public interest other than a broad appeal to defend trade secret misappropriation. (Opp'n 29.) Instead, Defendant cites cases standing for the proposition that where a party has not shown likelihood of success on the merits, irreparable harm, or a balance of the equities then an injunction is not in the public interest. (Id. at 29-30 (citing, e.g., OG Int'l, Ltd. v. Ubisoft Entm't, No C 11-4980 CRB, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124020, 2011 WL 5079552, at *11 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 26, 2011)).)

Here, the Court agrees, in theory, with Plaintiff's proposition that trade secrets should be protected. However, because Plaintiff has not demonstrated that it has a likelihood of success for a trade secret misappropriation claim, the Court finds an injunction in this instance is not in the public interest.



CONCLUSION
The Court finds the dispositive factor to be that Plaintiff has not carried its burden to demonstrate a likelihood of success on the merits. Further, the Court finds that Plaintiff's irreparable harm is speculative and difficult to quantify given its early stage and the fact it has not released a product. Finally, the Court finds that the balance of the equities does not clearly tip in Plaintiff's favor and the public interest does not favor an injunction. Accordingly, the Court DENIES Plaintiff's Motion for a Preliminary Injunction, (ECF [*45]  No. 5).

IT IS SO ORDERED.

Dated: July 9, 2018

/s/ Janis L. Sammartino

Hon. Janis L. Sammartino

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court granted Plaintiff's Motion to Seal, (ECF No. 8), and pin citations to Plaintiff's moving papers are to the sealed document located at ECF No. 9-1. At oral argument, the parties agreed a public order is appropriate in this case. Accordingly, the Court redacts the portions of each party's filings that they requested be sealed.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court granted Defendant's Motion to Seal, (ECF No. 23), and pin citations to Defendant's Opposition brief are to the sealed document located at ECF No. 24.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff provides a definition of blockchain technology, which the Court finds useful in understanding the underlying technology:

Blockchain technology consists of a publicly-distributed ledger that records transactions between multiple parties by containing a cryptographic hash of the previous transaction, a timestamp, and transaction data. These transactions are distributed and recorded across multiple computers, ensuring that there are multiple copies to prevent altering a transaction record. This allows the ledger to be easily verifiable despite being decentralized.

(MTN 5 n.1 (citing The Great Chain of Being Sure About Things, The Economist, https://www-economist-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/briefing/2015/10/31/the-great-chain-of-being-sure-about-things, (Oct. 31, 2015)).)
4Link to the location of the note in the document
Pin citations to docketed material refer to the CM/ECF page numbers electronically stamped at the top of each page.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
For example, a representative of the NBA team the Los Angeles Clippers reached out to Mr. Flavelle via LinkedIn. (Opp'n 11-12.) Additionally, Mr. Flavelle publicly tweeted at the rappers Ghostface Killer, Young Thug, and Lil B, as well as the singer Poppy. (Id. at 10.) There is no indication in the record that any of these artists responded.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Ms. Rebak states that outside of two individuals she courtesy copied on an email response to Mr. Feinblatt, she did not circulate his slide deck to anyone at Axiom. (Rebak Decl. ¶ 21.) Further, the two employees, Kim Cope and Julia Leao, also state that they did not circulate the slide deck to anyone in the company. (Declaration of Kim Cope, ECF No. 21-3, ¶¶ 6, 8; Declaration of Julia Leao, ECF No. 22-17, ¶ 5.)

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's slides also depicted attorneys who apparently constituted Plaintiff's "Regulatory Team." (Ex. C, ECF No. 9-5, at 9.) These attorneys worked for Cooley LLP, who also represents Defendant in this litigation. At oral argument, the Court inquired whether a conflict of interest existed for one firm to represent both sides. (ECF No. 31, at 3.) Defendant answered that the Cooley attorney(s) who interacted with Plaintiff have been walled off from this litigation. (Id. at 6.) And, more importantly, Cooley's attorneys never signed an agreement to represent Plaintiff; essentially, Cooley rebuffed Plaintiff's business offer and Cooley did not represent Plaintiff. (Id.) Plaintiff's counsel replied that they could not determine what information, if any, had been transmitted from Plaintiff to Cooley, (id. at 5), but did not think there was sufficient conflict to raise the issue before the Court, (id. at 8). Based on the information before the Court, it does not appear that there is a conflict of interest, nor does either party make such an argument. Thus, the Court notes that it has considered the issue and finds it does not affect this motion.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
Mr. Flavelle states that the meeting in question occurred February 7, 2018. (Flavelle Decl. ¶ 12.) However, Mr. Breton's email sent 10:27 a.m. on February 7, 2018 references "[g]reat times last night." (Ex. 6 (emphasis added).) It appears the meeting occurred on February 6, 2018 and Mr. Breton followed up by email the next day.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
In its Reply brief, Plaintiff attempts to rebut Defendant's argument that it had no intention of working with Plaintiff, but sent several responses to Plaintiff to be "polite." (Reply 6.) Plaintiff contends that Defendant insisted on Plaintiff signing a mutual non-disclosure agreement and suggests that "[i]t strains credulity that Axiom Zen would force its own contract on Starcoin if Axiom Zen truly had no intention of working with Starcoin." (Id.)

Plaintiff's argument attempts to rewrite the sequence of events. Mr. Feinblatt emailed Defendant on February 8, 2018. (Ex. A, at 2.) Ms. Rebak responded the same day asking for "additional details about [Starcoin]." (Id.) Before sending his company's information, Mr. Feinblatt requested a non-disclosure agreement. (Id. at 3.) Ms. Rebak responded requesting to use Defendant's NDA so she would not have engage Axiom's legal team. (Id.) After both parties signed the agreement, Mr. Feinblatt sent his company's slide deck. It was only after the NDA was signed that Ms. Rebak would have reason to delay and be polite to Mr. Feinblatt. (See id. at 16, 18 (depicting "polite" email responses from Ms. Rebak on February 19, 2018).) That the parties would enter into an NDA before transmitting their proprietary information is unremarkable. Plaintiff's argument that the Court should read into Ms. Rebak's responses after receiving Plaintiff's information is unpersuasive.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff theorizes that Defendant's potential licensing deals for celebrities are not the driving factor behind CryptoKitty sales. (See Reply 7.) Plaintiff cites sales data from Defendant's initial sales of CryptoKitties. The Court does not find this persuasive because the sales data demonstrates that Defendant had a product that people wanted to buy. If Defendant were able to associate with celebrities then it is logical that celebrity likenesses might further drive sales.

 I. Background
Marcus Andrade is the founder of several technology companies in the biometric, data cross sharing, blockchain, and digital currency market2Link to the text of the note and Plaintiff is a financial technology company. Andrade [*2]  is a limited partner of Plaintiff and is responsible for its management.3Link to the text of the note One of Andrade's companies licensed Plaintiff to enter into sublicenses for use of the technology. Plaintiff licensed its technology to its affiliate, CrossVerify Limited ("CrossVerify"), a United Kingdom ("UK") company of which Plaintiff owns the controlling shares.4Link to the text of the note CrossVerify is a biometric authentication company that uses blockchain technology to create an authentication utility that complies with anti-money laundering and know-your-customer regulations across industries.5Link to the text of the note Defendant Ralph Home is a citizen of the UK who works and lives in the UK.6Link to the text of the note He became CrossVerify's Chief Executive Officer in May of 2017.7Link to the text of the note Defendant signed a Non-Disclosure, Confidentiality, Inventions, and Non-Solicitation Agreement ("Agreement"), which governs Defendant's responsibilities regarding Plaintiff's confidential information and trade secrets.8Link to the text of the note Plaintiff alleges that in November of 2017 Defendant deceived Plaintiff into giving Defendant access to Plaintiff's U.S. server by falsely telling Mr. Andrade that he needed the login credentials so that a vendor could perform a security audit.9Link to the text of the note Plaintiff alleges that in March of 2018 Defendant, [*3]  or people acting in concert with him, gained access to Plaintiff's servers and downloaded confidential and proprietary information.10Link to the text of the note Plaintiff immediately terminated its license with CrossVerify, and Defendant resigned on April 9, 2018.11Link to the text of the note

Defendant moves to dismiss this action arguing that the court lacks personal jurisdiction over him and lacks subject matter jurisdiction because the parties' dispute is subject to mandatory arbitration in London, England.12Link to the text of the note On May 22, 2018, Fintech filed Plaintiff's Response. Defendant filed a reply and Plaintiff filed a surreply.13Link to the text of the note



II. Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction
Defendant argues that the court lacks personal jurisdiction over him.14Link to the text of the note Plaintiff responds that the court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant either under the traditional minimum contacts analysis or under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 4(k) (2).15Link to the text of the note



A. Standard of Review
Dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction is governed by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(2). When a foreign defendant moves to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction under Rule 12(b)(2), "the plaintiff 'bears the burden of establishing the district court's jurisdiction over the defendant.'" Quick Technologies, Inc. v. Sage Group PLC, 313 F.3d 338, 343 (5th Cir. 2002), cert, denied, 540 U.S. 814, 124 S. Ct. 66, 157 L. Ed. 2d 29 (2003) (quoting Mink v. AAAA Development LLC, 190 F.3d 333, 335 (5th Cir. 1999)). "When the district court rules on a motion to dismiss for lack of personal [*4]  jurisdiction 'without an evidentiary hearing, the plaintiff may bear his burden by presenting a prima facie case that personal jurisdiction is proper.'" Id. (quoting Wilson v. Belin, 20 F.3d 644, 648 (5th Cir.), cert, denied, 513 U.S. 930, 115 S. Ct. 322, 130 L. Ed. 2d 282 (1994)). "In making its determination, the district court may consider the contents of the record before the court at the time of the motion, including 'affidavits, interrogatories, depositions, oral testimony, or any combination of the recognized methods of discovery.'" Id. at 344 (quoting Thompson v. Chrysler Motors Corp., 755 F.2d 1162, 1165 (5th Cir. 1985)) . The court must accept as true the uncontroverted allegations in the plaintiff's Complaint and must resolve in favor of the plaintiff any factual conflicts. Guidry v. United States Tobacco Co., Inc., 188 F.3d 619, 625 (5th Cir. 1999) . However, the court is not obligated to credit conclusory allegations, even if uncontroverted. Panda Brandywine Corp. v. Potomac Electric Power Co., 253 F.3d 865, 869 (5th Cir. 2001). "Absent any dispute as to the relevant facts, the issue of whether personal jurisdiction may be exercised over a nonresident defendant is a question of law to be determined ... by th[e] Court." Ruston Gas Turbines, Inc. v. Donaldson Co., Inc., 9 F.3d 415, 418 (5th Cir. 1993).



B. Applicable Law

1. Personal Jurisdiction Under the 14th Amendment
A federal district court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant if "(1) the forum state's long-arm statute confers personal jurisdiction over that defendant; and (2) the exercise of personal jurisdiction comports [*5]  with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." McFadin v. Gerber, 587 F.3d 753, 759 (5th Cir. 2009), cert, denied, 562 U.S. 827, 131 S. Ct. 68, 178 L. Ed. 2d 23 (2010). Since the Texas long-arm statute extends as far as constitutional due process allows, the court considers only the second step of the inquiry. Id.

Exercise of personal jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant comports with federal due process guarantees when the nonresident defendant has established minimum contacts with the forum state, and the exercise of jurisdiction "does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" International Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, Office of Unemployment Compensation and Placement, 326 U.S. 310, 66 S. Ct. 154, 158, 90 L. Ed. 95 (1945) (quoting Milliken v. Meyer, 311 U.S. 457, 61 S. Ct. 339, 343, 85 L. Ed. 278 (1940)). Once a plaintiff satisfies these two requirements, a presumption arises that jurisdiction is reasonable, and the burden of proof and persuasion shifts to the defendant opposing jurisdiction to present "a compelling case that the presence of some other considerations would render jurisdiction unreasonable." Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 105 S. Ct. 2174, 2185, 85 L. Ed. 2d 528 (1985). "The 'minimum contacts' inquiry is fact intensive and no one element is decisive; rather the touchstone is whether the defendant's conduct shows that it 'reasonably anticipates being haled into court.'" McFadin, 587 F.3d at 759.

"There are two types of 'minimum contacts': those that give rise to specific personal jurisdiction and those that give rise to general personal jurisdiction." Lewis v. Fresne, 252 F.3d 352, 358 (5th Cir. 2001) . Because the parties agree that [*6]  the court does not have general jurisdiction over Defendant, the relevant inquiry is whether the court can exercise specific jurisdiction over Defendant.16Link to the text of the note

A court may exercise specific jurisdiction when the alleged injuries arise from or are directly related to the nonresident defendant's contacts with the forum state. Gundle Lining Construction Corp. v. Adams County Asphalt, Inc., 85 F.3d 201, 205 (5th Cir. 1996) (citing Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 104 S. Ct. 1868, 1872 n.8, 80 L. Ed. 2d 404 (1984)); and Quick Technologies, 313 F.3d at 344. To determine whether specific jurisdiction exists, a court must "examine the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation to determine whether maintaining the suit offends traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice." Gundle Lining, 85 F.3d at 205. Even a single contact can support specific jurisdiction if the defendant "'purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws.'" Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2183. "The non-resident's 'purposeful availment' must be such that the defendant 'should reasonably anticipate being haled into court' in the forum state." Ruston Gas, 9 F.3d at 419 (citing World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 100 S. Ct. 559, 567, 62 L. Ed. 2d 490 (1980)).

There are three parts to a purposeful availment inquiry. First, only the defendant's contacts with the forum are relevant, not the unilateral activity of the plaintiff or a third party. Sangha v. Navig8 ShipManagement Private Limited, 882 F.3d 96, 103 (5th Cir. 2018) (citing Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 134 S. Ct. 1115, 1122, 188 L. Ed. 2d 12 (2014) ("We have [*7]  consistently rejected attempts to satisfy the defendant-focused 'minimum contacts' inquiry by demonstrating contacts between the plaintiff (or third parties) and the forum State.")). Second, the contacts relied upon must be purposeful rather than random, fortuitous, or attenuated. Id. (citing Walden, 134 S. Ct. at 1123). Finally, the defendant must seek some benefit, advantage, or profit by availing itself of the jurisdiction. Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2183. A defendant may purposefully avoid a particular forum by structuring its transactions in such a way as to neither profit from the forum's laws nor subject itself to jurisdiction there. Moki Mac River Expeditions v. Drugg, 221 S.W.3d 569, 575 (Tex. 2007) (citing Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2181-85). Since specific jurisdiction is claim specific, "[a] plaintiff bringing multiple claims that arise out of different forum contacts of the defendant must establish specific jurisdiction for each claim." Seiferth v. Helicopteros Atuneros, Inc., 472 F.3d 266, 274 (5th Cir. 2006).



2. Personal Jurisdiction Under Rule 4(k)(2)
Rule 4(k)(2) states:

Federal Claim Outside State-Court Jurisdiction. For a claim that arises under federal law, serving a summons or filing a waiver of service establishes personal jurisdiction over a defendant if:

(A) the defendant is not subject to jurisdiction in any state's courts of general jurisdiction; and

(B) exercising jurisdiction is consistent with [*8]  the United States Constitution and laws.

Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(k)(2). Where the defendant lacks "sufficient contacts to satisfy the due process concerns of the long-arm statute of any particular state [,]" Rule 4(k) (2) allows courts to consider whether the defendant's contacts with the United States as a whole satisfy due process standards. World Tanker Carriers Corp. v. M/V Ya Mawlaya, 99 F.3d 717, 720 (5th Cir. 1996); see also Adams v. Unione Mediterranea di Sicurta, 364 F.3d 646, 651 (5th Cir. 2004) ("[S]o long as a defendant does not concede to jurisdiction in another state, a court may use 4 (k) (2) to confer jurisdiction."). "The due process required in federal cases governed by Rule 4(k)(2) is measured with reference to the Fifth Amendment, rather than the Fourteenth Amendment." Submersible Systems, Inc. v. Perforadora Central, S.A. de C.V., 249 F.3d 413, 420 (5th Cir. 2001).17Link to the text of the note For purposes of Rule 4(k) (2) the United States is the applicable forum for the minimum contacts analysis under general and specific personal jurisdiction. See Patterson v. Aker Solutions Incorporated, 826 F.3d 231, 233-34 (5th Cir. 2016) (general); Quick Technologies, 313 F.3d at 344 (specific).
The plaintiff has the initial burden to "plead and prove the requisite contacts with the United States and plead Rule 4(k)(2)'s applicability . . . but it [has] no burden to negate jurisdiction in every state." Nagravision SA v. Gotech International Technology Limited, 882 F.3d 494, 499 (5th Cir. 2018). Once the plaintiff meets that burden through prima facie evidence, the burden shifts to the defendant to "affirmatively establish that the court lacked personal jurisdiction under 4(k) (2) because there was a state where its courts of general jurisdiction could properly [*9]  exercise jurisdiction over it." Id. (citing Adams, 364 F.3d at 650). Because only specific jurisdiction applies in this case, Plaintiff must establish that its cause of action arises from or is directly related to Defendant's contacts with the United States, Helicopteros, 104 S. Ct. at 1872 n.8, and that Defendant purposefully availed itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the United States. Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2183.



C. Analysis

1. 14th Amendment Personal Jurisdiction

a. Minimum Contacts
Defendant argues that the court does not have specific jurisdiction over him because he did not purposely direct any activities giving rise to this cause of action towards Texas, the Agreement reflects that he did not purposefully direct actions towards Texas, and he did not consent to jurisdiction in Texas for these claims.18Link to the text of the note Defendant argues that although Plaintiff alleges that Defendant accessed Plaintiff's servers and improperly obtained Plaintiff's proprietary information, "[t]here is no allegation that any of theses alleged activities took place in Texas or that Fintech's server is even located in Texas."19Link to the text of the note Plaintiff responds that Defendant "directed tortious communications and actions toward Texas, and those communications and actions give rise to Fintech's two federal statutory [*10]  claims."20Link to the text of the note In support, Plaintiff cites telephone calls and emails Defendant made to Andrade while Andrade was in Texas in which Defendant made fraudulent statements to obtain the login information to Plaintiff's server.21Link to the text of the note Plaintiff argues that "Home and his associates used those credentials in order to steal Fintech's Confidential Information and sabotage Fintech's software, causing Fintech substantial harm in Texas and elsewhere."22Link to the text of the note Defendant argues that "there is no evidence that Home knew Andrade was in Texas at the time the phone calls were allegedly made and email allegedly sent."23Link to the text of the note

"A single act by a defendant can be enough to confer personal jurisdiction if that act gives rise to the claim being asserted." Lewis, 252 F.3d at 358-59. A single telephone call can be sufficient to confer personal jurisdiction over a defendant. See Brown v. Flowers Industries, Inc., 688 F.2d 328, 332-33 (5th Cir. 1982). "When the actual content of communications with a forum gives rise to intentional tort causes of action, this alone constitutes purposeful availment." Wien Air Alaska, Inc. v. Brandt, 195 F.3d 208, 213 (5th Cir 1999).

Although there is no evidence that Defendant knew that Andrade was in Texas when Defendant contacted him, Andrade is Plaintiff's representative.24Link to the text of the note Defendant's telephone call was therefore directed toward Plaintiff, which is a limited [*11]  partnership organized under the laws of the State of Texas with its principal place of business in Texas. At least one email that Defendant sent to Andrade regarding the allegedly false security audits was sent to Plaintiff's corporate email address at "fintechfund@crossverify. global."25Link to the text of the note See Small Ventures USA, L.P. v. Rizvi Traverse Management. LLC, Civil Action No. H-ll-3072, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142436, 2012 WL 4621130, at *5 (S.D. Tex. Oct. 2, 2012) (holding that the defendants had minimum contacts to Texas when the they "dialed the phone numbers of Plaintiff's representatives and directed emails to the email accounts of the Houston company. Defendants in these communications made their false representations . . .") . Moreover, Plaintiff produced evidence that Defendant knew that Plaintiff's offices are located in Texas,26Link to the text of the note and Defendant does not deny that he knew that Plaintiff's office is located in Texas.27Link to the text of the note

The content of the telephone and email communications directing Andrade to secure login credentials for Home gives rise to the underlying causes of action.28Link to the text of the note Plaintiff alleges that Defendant violated the Defend Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1839, when he "misappropriated [Plaintiff]'s trade secrets by acquiring them through improper means, as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 1839(6)."29Link to the text of the note The term "improper means" includes "misrepresentation." 18 U.S.C. § 1839(6). Because Plaintiff alleges that Defendant [*12]  secured the login credentials for Plaintiff's servers by making false statements in Defendant's telephone call and emails to Plaintiff, Plaintiff's claim for violation of the Defend Trade Secrets Act arises out of those communications. Plaintiff's claim for violation of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1030, et seq., is based on "[Home's] unauthorized access" of Plaintiff's computers with the intent to misappropriate trade secrets and confidential information.30Link to the text of the note Because Defendant allegedly obtained the login information through fraudulent means, Defendant's access was not authorized. The court concludes that Plaintiff has established that Defendant knew that Plaintiff was located in Texas and that Defendant therefore would have known that its actions were purposefully directed toward Texas. Because Plaintiff has met its prima facie burden, the court has specific jurisdiction over Defendant. See Lewis, 252 F.3d at 358-59 (concluding that the content of the defendants' communications to the plaintiff shows purposeful availment when the defendants participated in a phone conversation "that was designed to convince [the plaintiff] to make the $650,000 loan").



b. Exercise of Personal Jurisdiction Over the Defendant [*13]  is Fair and Reasonable
In deciding whether it is fair and reasonable to require a nonresident defendant to litigate in Texas, a court must consider several factors: (1) the burden on the nonresident defendant; (2) the interests of the forum state; (3) the plaintiff's interest in securing relief; (4) the interstate judicial system's interest in obtaining the most efficient resolution of controversies; and (5) the shared interest of the several states in furthering fundamental substantive social policies. Central Freight Lines Inc. v. APA Transport Corp. , 322 F.3d 376, 384 (5th Cir. 2003) (citing Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2185, and Asahi Metal Industry Co., Ltd. v. Superior Court of California, Solano County, 480 U.S. 102, 107 S. Ct. 1026, 1033, 94 L. Ed. 2d 92 (1987)).

Once a plaintiff establishes minimum contacts between the defendant and the forum State, the burden of proof shifts to the defendant to show that the assertion of jurisdiction is unfair and unreasonable. Wien Air Alaska, Inc. v. Brandt, 195 F.3d 208, 215 (5th Cir. 1999). The defendant must make a "compelling case."

Central Freight Lines, 322 F.3d at 384 (quoting Burger King, 105 S. Ct. at 2185).
Defendant argues (1) that assertion of personal jurisdiction over him would offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice because he will incur significant costs in defense of Plaintiff's claims, he will be burdened by travel from London to Texas, he has no connection to Texas; (2) that the judicial system's interest in resolving the dispute is not impacted because arbitration offers an efficient [*14]  resolution; and (3) that the state's interest in furthering social policies does not outweigh the burden on Defendant.31Link to the text of the note While litigation in Texas may be inconvenient for Defendant, Plaintiff could be equally inconvenienced if required to litigate in the United Kingdom. Defendant has previously traveled to Texas on business and has offered no reason as to why litigating in Texas is especially burdensome to him.32Link to the text of the note Texas has an interest in this case because it involves a Texas business whose trade secrets were allegedly misappropriated, and the effects of Defendant's alleged actions were felt in Texas. Exercising personal jurisdiction over Defendant in this case does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice in light of Texas' interest in the case. Wien Air Alaska, 195 F.3d at 215 ("[O]nce minimum contacts are established, the interests of the forum and the plaintiff justify even large burdens on the defendant.").



2. Personal Jurisdiction Under Rule 4(k)(2)
Because Defendant has not conceded to jurisdiction in another state, and because there is no dispute that Plaintiff's claims arise under federal law, the court may have personal jurisdiction under Rule 4 (k) (2) if Defendant has sufficient ties with the United States [*15]  to satisfy due process. Adams, 364 F.3d at 651. The court uses the same legal standards developed in the Fourteenth Amendment context -- i.e., the minimum contacts analysis in the assertion of specific jurisdiction -- but the United States is the relevant forum. World Tanker Carriers Corp. v. M/V Ya Mawlaya, 99 F.3d 717, 723 (5th Cir. 1996).

Defendant argues that "Fintech has not identified the location of its servers other than to say they are in the United States."33Link to the text of the note Plaintiff responds that "though Home may not have had reason to know which specific state Fintech's server was located in, he certainly knew or had reason [to] know this U.S. company's server was located in the United States."34Link to the text of the note

Purposefully accessing or targeting a company's server that is located in the forum can satisfy minimum contacts. See Abatix Corp. v. Capra, Civil Action No. 2:07-541, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 73083, 2008 WL 4427285, at *3 (E.D. Tex. Sept. 24, 2008) (holding that minimum contacts were met when "Defendants specifically directed their actions at Abatix's computer server, located within Collin County, Texas[,] in a manner that allegedly harmed Abatix in the State of Texas."); United States v. Batato, 833 F.3d 413, 425 (4th Cir. 2016) ("[T]he servers themselves held and allowed the transfer of the copyrighted material--they were the central conduit by which the conspiracy was conducted. The location of a substantial number of the servers in Virginia is clearly [*16]  enough to demonstrate purposeful availment.").

As discussed in Section C(l) (a) above, Plaintiff has established that Defendant knew that Plaintiff was a United States company, and Defendant does not deny that it had knowledge that Plaintiff's office is located in Texas. Plaintiff alleges that "Home or people acting in concert with him or under his direction logged into Fintech's US-based servers."35Link to the text of the note Plaintiff produced evidence that Andrade provided Defendant "login credentials for Fintech's US-based server."36Link to the text of the note Defendant denies that he unlawfully accessed the server, but acknowledged that he was "provided with a username to the website server."37Link to the text of the note Because Plaintiff is entitled to have factual conflicts resolved in his favor, Wien Air Alaska, 195 F.3d at 211, and because Plaintiff has shown that its U.S. server was accessed and that Defendant knew that the server was located in the United States, Plaintiff has shown that Defendant's actions were intentionally aimed at the United States.

Plaintiff's claims arise out of or relate to Defendant's alleged unlawful access of Plaintiff's U.S. servers. Without access to Plaintiff's servers Defendant would not have obtained confidential information and trade secrets in violation of [*17]  the Defend Trade Secrets Act and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Finally, for the reasons discussed in Section C(l)(b) above, the court concludes that exercising personal jurisdiction over Defendant under Rule 4(k)(2) is constitutionally reasonable.



Ill. Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction and Improper Venue
Defendant moves to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(1) arguing that the court lacks subject matter jurisdiction to resolve a dispute that is subject to mandatory arbitration and under Rule 12(b)(3) arguing that venue is improper.38Link to the text of the note



A. Agreement to Arbitrate
Defendant moves to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction because the Agreement requires that except for claims against Plaintiff, all disputes must be resolved by arbitration in London, England, and Plaintiff's claims against Defendant fall within the scope of the arbitration clause.39Link to the text of the note Plaintiff responds that the arbitration clause is not enforceable and that Plaintiff's claims fall outside the scope of the arbitration clause.40Link to the text of the note In its Reply Defendant argues that the Agreement contains an implied delegation clause, but that even if the court decides arbitrability, Plaintiff's claims fall within the arbitration clause .41Link to the text of the note

"Subject-matter jurisdiction [*18]  properly comprehended refers to a tribunal's power to hear a case, and can never be forfeited or waived." Union Pacific Railroad Co. v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen General Committee of Adjustment, Central Region, 558 U.S. 67, 130 S. Ct. 584, 589, 175 L. Ed. 2d 428 (2009) (citations and quotations omitted). Because "mandatory grievance and arbitration procedures in contracts . . . are waivable [they] do not affect this court's subject-matter jurisdiction." Ruiz v. Donahoe, 784 F.3d 247, 249 (5th Cir. 2015). "[A]greements to arbitrate implicate forum selection and claims-processing rules[,] not subject matter jurisdiction." Id. at 250. The court has subject matter jurisdiction over Plaintiff's claims under the Defend Trade Secrets Act and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act because those claims arise under the laws of the United States.



1. Applicable Law
Under the Federal Arbitration Act ("FAA") an arbitration clause in a contract evidencing a transaction involving interstate commerce is "valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract." 9 U.S.C. § 2.42Link to the text of the note Underlying the FAA is "the fundamental principle that arbitration is a matter of contract." AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion, 563 U.S. 333, 131 S. Ct. 1740, 1745, 179 L. Ed. 2d 742 (2011) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Washington Mutual Finance Group, LLC v. Bailey, 364 F.3d 260, 264 (5th Cir. 2004) ("The purpose of the FAA is to give arbitration agreements the same force and effect as other contracts --no more and no less.").

In determining whether to enforce [*19]  an arbitration clause "[f]irst, the court asks whether there is a valid agreement to arbitrate and, second, whether the current dispute falls within the scope of a valid agreement." Edwards v. Doordash, Inc., 888 F.3d 738, 743 (5th Cir. 2018) (citing Klein v. Nabors Drilling USA L.P., 710 F.3d 234, 236 (5th Cir. 2013)). "Whether [the parties] entered a valid arbitration contract turns on state contract law." Kubala v. Supreme Production Services, Incorporated, 830 F.3d 199, 202 (5th Cir. 2016). If the parties have entered into a binding agreement to arbitrate, the court must determine whether any federal statute or policy renders the claims nonarbitrable. JP Morgan Chase & Co. v. Conegie ex rel. Lee, 492 F.3d 596, 598 (5th Cir. 2007). If the party seeking arbitration argues that there is a delegation clause -- a written agreement referring disputes about arbitrability to an arbitrator -- the court performs the first step of the analysis to determine if an agreement to arbitrate was formed, then determines if it contains a valid delegation clause.43Link to the text of the note Edwards, 888 F.3d at 743-44.

[W]e first look to see if an agreement to arbitrate was formed, then determine if it contains a delegation clause. If there is an agreement to arbitrate with a delegation clause, and absent a challenge to the delegation clause itself, we will consider that clause to be valid and compel arbitration. Challenges to the arbitration agreement as a whole are to be heard by the arbitrator. Arguments that an agreement to arbitrate [*20]  was never formed, though, are to be heard by the court even where a delegation clause exists. See Kubala, 830 F.3d at 202. Since Kubala, we have reiterated that the first step of the test is limited to contract formation.

Id. at 744. The party seeking to invalidate an agreement to arbitrate bears the burden of establishing its invalidity. Carter v. Countrywide Credit Industries, Inc., 362 F.3d 294, 297 (5th Cir. 2004). A court should resolve all doubts concerning the arbitrability of claims in favor of arbitration. Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614, 105 S. Ct. 3346, 3353-54, 87 L. Ed. 2d 444 (1985).


2. Whether There is an Agreement to Arbitrate
The Arbitration and Dispute Resolution clause ("Arbitration Clause") in Section 12 of the Agreement states:

A. Except for any claims against FTF, all disputes, controversies or claims arising out of or relating to this Agreement (including for any breach, invalidity or interpretation of this Agreement), any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with this Agreement, the relationship between Horne and the Company, services performed for or on behalf of the Company, shall be finally adjudicated by arbitration under the London Court of International Arbitration ("LCIA") Rules in force at the date of this Agreement, which are deemed to be incorporated by reference into this section 12A, subject to other provisions of this section 12A. . . . [T]he arbitration [*21]  agreement in this section 12A is governed by English law. . . .

B. All disputes, controversies or claims arising out of or relating to this Agreement (including for any breach, invalidity or interpretation of this Agreement as to FTF), and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with this Agreement against FTF shall be finally adjudicated by arbitration before JAMS, Inc. . . .

. . .

D. If the provisions for arbitration in this Agreement are for any reason invalidated or deemed unenforceable the parties agree to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction and venue of the federal courts located in Houston, Texas, USA, for any legal suit, action or proceeding arising out of or based upon this Agreement, the breach of this Agreement, or any other aspect of the parties' relationship, including claims against the Company or FTF and/or their or against their affiliates. . . .44Link to the text of the note

The Choice of Law: Jurisdiction and Venue clause ("Forum-Selection Clause") in Section 14 of the Agreement states:
14. Choice of Law: Jurisdiction and Venue. Except as to claims against FTF, this Agreement and any dispute or claim arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formulation (including non-contractual disputes [*22]  or claims) shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales. Each party irrevocably agrees that the courts of England and Wales shall have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim arising out of or in connection with this Agreement or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims), except as to claims against FTF. As to claims against FTF, any dispute, controversy, or proceeding arising out of or related to this Agreement shall be brought solely and exclusively in Houston, Texas, United States of America.45Link to the text of the note

The Agreement contains a survival clause stating that Sections 12 and 14 will survive termination of the Agreement, and a severability clause stating that any unenforceable provisions will not invalidate the remainder of the Agreement.46Link to the text of the note
Defendant argues that under Section 14 of the Agreement "the courts of England and Wales H have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve any issue related to contract formation except as to claims against Fintech (FTF)."47Link to the text of the note Plaintiff responds that Sections 12(A) and 14 are irreconcilably inconsistent and therefore the parties did not have a meeting of the minds as to how disputes against Defendant would be adjudicated. [*23] 48Link to the text of the note

"[T]he question whether an arbitration provision conflicts with other dispute resolution provisions is properly analyzed under the 'validity' step of the arbitration analysis." Sharpe v. AmeriPlan Corp., 769 F.3d 909, 915 (5th Cir. 2014) (citation omitted). "State law . . . thus controls that question and the Federal Arbitration Act's presumption in favor of arbitration is not implicated." Id. The parties do not dispute that Texas law governs this issue. Under Texas law when interpreting a contract the court "examine[s] the entire agreement in an effort to harmonize and give effect to all provisions of the contract so that none will be meaningless." MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. Texas Utilities Electric Co., 995 S.W.2d 647, 652 (Tex. 1999). "[A]n ambiguous or inconsistent provision of a contract should be construed strictly against the party that drafted it." Bexar County Hospital District v. Factory Mutual Insurance Co., 475 F.3d 274, 277 (5th Cir. 2007) (citing Gonzalez v. Mission American Insurance Co., 795 S.W.2d 734, 737 (Tex. 1990)).

In Sharpe the Fifth Circuit analyzed whether the language in a previously-signed Sales Director Agreement could be reconciled with the arbitration clause in a revised Policy Manual (which did not supersede the previous agreement). Sharpe, 769 F.3d at 912. The Sales Director Agreement stated that "'[t]his agreement is to be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. Any action brought on matters relating to this Agreement shall be maintained in Dallas, Dallas [*24]  County, Texas.'" Id. at 913. The Policy Manual stated that "[a]ny issue, dispute, claim or controversy . . . between AmeriPlan or any officer, director, employee, . . . of AmeriPlan and IBO/Sales Director, arising out of or relating to the . . . Sales Director Agreements . . ., shall be resolved by binding arbitration at the AmeriPlan headquarters in Plano, Texas. The Claim shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas." Id. The Fifth Circuit held that there was no inherent conflict "because lawsuits often precede arbitration (when a court may be asked to decide the validity, scope, and enforceability of an arbitration clause) or follow arbitration (when a court may be asked to enforce or set aside an arbitration award)." Id. at 916. "A forum selection clause thus still has effect in determining where any lawsuit -- even one that may result in an order compelling arbitration -- must be brought." Id.

The clauses at issue are similar to those in Sharpe and both may be given effect. Pursuant to Section 12 of the Agreement, Plaintiff may submit its claims against Defendant to arbitration in London, England. Pursuant to Section 14, the courts of England and Wales are the proper forum to resolve disputes regarding [*25]  arbitrability and to decide any claims against Defendant that are determined not to be arbitrable. See Sharpe, 769 F.3d at 916; Personal Security & Safety Systems Inc. v. Motorola Inc., 297 F.3d 388, 396 (5th Cir. 2002).



B. Venue
Defendant argues that Plaintiff has not met its burden of proving that venue in this court is proper, and that the court should dismiss this action under Rule 12(b)(3) because of the Arbitration and Forum-Selection Clauses in the Agreement.49Link to the text of the note "Rule 12(b)(3) allow[s] dismissal only when venue is 'wrong' or 'improper.' Whether venue is 'wrong' or 'improper' depends exclusively on whether the court in which the case was brought satisfies the requirements of federal venue laws, and those provisions say nothing about a forum-selection clause." Atlantic Marine Construction Co., Inc. v. United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, 571 U.S. 49, 134 S. Ct. 568, 577, 187 L. Ed. 2d 487 (2013). If venue is not proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391, the case must be dismissed or transferred, but "a case filed in a district that falls within § 1391 may not be dismissed under . . . Rule 12(b)(3)." Id. Because the court has concluded that it has personal jurisdiction over Defendant, venue in this court is proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(3).50Link to the text of the note

"[A]rbitration agreements are a 'specialized kind of forum-selection clause.'" Warren v. Federal National Mortgage Association,     F. App'x.     2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 11495, 2018 WL 2077904, at *10 (5th Cir. May 3, 2018) (quoting Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 417 U.S. 506, 94 S. Ct. 2449, 2457, 41 L. Ed. 2d 270 (1974)). "[T]he appropriate way to enforce a forum-selection clause pointing to a state or foreign forum is through the doctrine of forum non conveniens." Atlantic Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 580. Although Defendant did not move to dismiss on the basis of forum non conveniens, based on Defendant's argument that the Agreement mandates that the action be arbitrated under the aegis of the courts of England and Wales, the court will evaluate whether dismissal under forum non conveniens is appropriate.



1. Applicable Law
"A federal court has discretion to dismiss a case on the ground of forum non conveniens when an alternative forum has jurisdiction to hear [the] case, and . . . trial in the chosen forum would establish . . . oppressiveness and vexation to a defendant . . . out of all proportion to plaintiff's convenience, or . . . the chosen forum [is] [*27]  inappropriate because of considerations affecting the court's own administrative and legal problems." Sinochem International Co. Ltd. v. Malaysia International Shipping Corp., 549 U.S. 422, 127 S. Ct. 1184, 1190, 167 L. Ed. 2d 15 (2007) (internal quotations and citations omitted). In considering forum non conveniens the court ordinarily must weigh the parties' private interests, the plaintiff's choice of forum, and various public-interest factors. Atlantic Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 581. A valid forum-selection clause simplifies the forum non conveniens doctrine because (1) the plaintiff's choice of forum is given no weight and (2) the private-interest factors weigh in favor of the preselected forum so that the court only considers public-interest factors. Barnett v. DynCorp International, L.L.C., 831 F.3d 296, 300 (5th Cir. 2016) (citing Atlantic Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 581-82). Therefore, "a 'valid' forum-selection clause pointing to a foreign tribunal requires forum non conveniens dismissal absent unusual circumstances." Id. at 301 (citing Atlantic Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 581-83 & n.8.).

Federal Law governs the enforceability of a forum-selection clause. Id. The law

requires a party attacking a forum-selection clause to overcome a presumption of enforceability by showing that the clause is "'unreasonable' under the circumstances" because

(1) the incorporation of the forum selection clause into the agreement was the product of fraud or overreaching; (2) the party seeking to escape enforcement "will for all practical [*28]  purposes be deprived of his day in court" because of the grave inconvenience or unfairness of the selected forum; (3) the fundamental unfairness of the chosen law will deprive the plaintiff of a remedy; or (4) enforcement of the forum selection clause would contravene a strong public policy of the forum state.

Id. (quoting Haynsworth v. The Corporation, 121 F.3d 956, 963 (5th Cir. 1997)).


2. Application
Because Plaintiff drafted the Agreement51Link to the text of the note it cannot argue that Sections 12 and 14 were incorporated by fraud or overreach, or that English law would unfairly deprive Plaintiff of a remedy. Plaintiff will not be deprived a day in court because if necessary it can seek to compel arbitration in the courts of England and Wales under Section 14 of the Agreement. Because the court has already concluded that Sections 12 and 14 of the Agreement can be harmonized, the court concludes that the Forum-Selection Clause is enforceable. The court will therefore apply Atlantic Marine's forum non conveniens framework. See Atlantic Marine, 571 U.S. 49, 134 S. Ct. 568, 583 n.8, 187 L. Ed. 2d 487 (presuming that the forum-selection clause was valid and holding that the same standards apply to valid forum-selection clauses pointing to state or foreign forums). Because Plaintiff's choice of the court carries no weight and because the private-interest factors weigh in favor of the parties' preselected [*29]  forum, the court will only consider public-interest factors. See Atlantic Marine, 134 S. Ct. at 582. Those factors include

administrative difficulties flowing from court congestion; the local interest in having localized controversies decided at home; the interest in having the trial of a diversity case in a forum that is at home with the law that must govern the action; the avoidance of unnecessary problems in conflict of laws, or in the application of foreign law; and the unfairness of burdening citizens in an unrelated forum with jury duty.

Barnett, 831 F.3d at 309 (citations omitted). "These factors justify a refusal to enforce a forum-selection clause only in truly exceptional cases." Id. (internal quotations and citations omitted).
All of the public-interest factors weigh in favor of dismissal of this action. Defendant is a citizen of the UK, CrossVerify is a UK company, and the parties agreed that "the arbitration agreement in this Section 12A is governed by English law."52Link to the text of the note Should it be necessary to compel arbitration, the courts of England and Wales have an interest in deciding the controversy. England is not an unrelated forum because relevant parties and witnesses are citizens of the UK.



IV. Conclusions and Order
For the reasons explained above, [*30]  the court concludes that Plaintiff has met its burden of establishing facts capable of supporting the court's exercise of personal jurisdiction over Defendant Horne, but that pursuant to the parties' Agreement, this is not the proper court to compel arbitration. Accordingly, Defendant Ralph Horne's 12(b)(2) Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction and Subject Thereto, 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(3) Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction and Improper Venue (Docket Entry No. 18) is GRANTED, and this action will be dismissed without prejudice.

SIGNED at Houston, Texas, on this the 6th day of July, 2018.

/s/ Sim Lake

SIM LAKE

UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Original Complaint and Application for Temporary Restraining Order, Preliminary Injunction, and Permanent Injunction ("Complaint"), Docket Entry No. 1.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Declaration of Marcus Andrade in Support of Plaintiff Fintech Fund, FLP's Motion for Expedited Discovery and Extension of Time ("Second Andrade Declaration"), Exhibit B to Plaintiff Fintech Fund, FLP's Response in Opposition to Defendant Ralph Home's 12(b)(2) Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction and Subject Thereto, 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(3) for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction and Improper Venue ("Plaintiff's Response"), Docket Entry No. 25-3, p. 2 ¶ 2.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Declaration of Marcus Andrade in Support of Plaintiff Fintech Fund, FLP's Response in Opposition to Defendant Ralph Home's Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction ("Third Andrade Declaration"), Exhibit A to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-2, p. 3 ¶ 5.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 3 ¶¶ 9-10.

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 3 ¶ 10.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Ralph Home Declaration, Exhibit B to Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18-2, p. 2 ¶ 2.

7Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 4 ¶ 14.

8Link to the location of the note in the document
Agreement, Exhibit A to Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1-2.

9Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 7 ¶ 24; Third Andrade Declaration, Exhibit A to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-2, p. 3 ¶ 6.

10Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 7 ¶¶ 24-25.

11Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 8 ¶¶ 26-27.

12Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, pp. 2-3.

13Link to the location of the note in the document
See Defendant Ralph Home's Reply in Support of Motion to Dismiss ("Defendant's Reply"), Docket Entry No. 31; Plaintiff Fintech Fund, FLP's Surreply in Opposition to Defendant Ralph Home's 12(b) (2) Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction and Subject Thereto, 12(b) (1) and 12(b) (3) for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction and Improper Venue ("Plaintiff's Surreply"), Docket Entry No. 34.

14Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, pp. 3-10.

15Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25, pp. 17-19.

16Link to the location of the note in the document
See Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25, p. 13 (". . . [O]nly specific jurisdiction is at issue here.").

17Link to the location of the note in the document
"[W]hen applying Rule 4(k)(2), the Fifth Circuit has regularly adhered to the same legal standards developed in the Fourteenth Amendment context -- the now-familiar minimum contacts analysis[.]" Patterson v. Blue Offshore BV, Civil Action No. 13-337, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 87879, 2015 WL 4096581, at *9 (E.D. La. July 6, 2015) (affirmed by Patterson v. Aker Solutions Inc., 826 F.3d 231 (5th Cir. 2016)) (quotations and citations omitted).

18Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, pp. 5-6; see also Ralph Home Declaration, Exhibit B to Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18-2, p. 1 ¶ 3.

19Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, p. 5.

20Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25, p. 13.

21Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 15; Second Andrade Declaration, Exhibit B to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-3, p. 4 ¶ 8.

22Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, pp. 5-6.

23Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 8.

24Link to the location of the note in the document
Third Andrade Declaration, Exhibit A to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-2, p. 3 f 5 ("I am a limited partner of Fintech and, in that capacity, I am responsible for the management of Fintech.").

25Link to the location of the note in the document
Email Re: Fwd: Security Audit, Exhibit F to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-6.

26Link to the location of the note in the document
Third Andrade Declaration, Exhibit A to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-2, p. 3 ¶ 5 ("Ralph Home has long been aware that Fintech operates its principal place of business from Texas. Mr. Home and I have met in person in the Houston area on Fintech business, even before the events giving rise to this lawsuit."); Agreement, Exhibit A to Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1-2, ¶ 12(B) ("All disputes . . . against [Fintech] shall be finally adjudicated . . . in Houston, Texas, USA.").

27Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant denies knowing Andrade's location at the time Defendant contacted him, but does not deny that he knew Plaintiff is a Texas company. See Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, p. 9; Ralph Home Declaration ("Home Declaration"), Exhibit A to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-1, p. 5 ¶ 11.

28Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant admits that "[he] was provided with a username to the website server" but contends that he learned the "information was incorrect when [he] attempted to pass it on to another member of the CrossVerify staff." Defendant also asserts that "[he] ha[s] never accessed (or directed anyone else to access) Fintech's server for any improper purpose." See Home Declaration, Exhibit A to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-1, p. 4 ¶ 8, p. 6 ¶ 13. Although Defendant disputes that he fraudulently requested login information and disputes that he accessed Plaintiff's servers, "[w]here facts are disputed, the plaintiff presenting a prima facie case is entitled to have the conflicts resolved in his favor." Wien Air Alaska, 195 F.3d at 211 (citations omitted).

29Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 9 ¶ 34.

30Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 9 ¶ 37.

31Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, pp. 16-17.

32Link to the location of the note in the document
See Home Declaration, Exhibit A to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-1, p. 6 ¶ 14 ("I met Andrade in Texas to discuss CrossVerify business on two occasions.").

33Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, p. 18.

34Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's Surreply, Docket Entry No. 34, p. 11.

35Link to the location of the note in the document
Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1, p. 7 ¶ 24 (emphasis added).

36Link to the location of the note in the document
Second Andrade Declaration, Exhibit B to Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25-3, p. 4 ¶ 8 (emphasis added).

37Link to the location of the note in the document
Home Declaration, Exhibit A to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-1, p. 4 ¶ 8.

38Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, pp. 9-10.

39Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 10.

40Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25, pp. 24-25.

41Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, pp. 20-23.

42Link to the location of the note in the document
The parties do not dispute that the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards ("The Convention Act") governs this case. See Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, p. 19. But "the FAA applies to the extent that it is not in conflict with the Convention Act." Freudensprung v. Offshore Technical Services, Inc., 379 F.3d 327, 341 (5th Cir. 2004) (citations and quotations omitted) . The parties do not argue that a conflict exists between the FAA and The Convention Act.

43Link to the location of the note in the document
In his Reply Defendant argues that the Agreement contains an implied delegation clause because it incorporates English law. See Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31, p. 20.

44Link to the location of the note in the document
Agreement, Exhibit A to Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1-2, pp. 10-11 ¶ 12 (emphasis added).

45Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 11-12 ¶ 14 (emphasis added).

46Link to the location of the note in the document
Id. at 11-12 ¶¶ 13, 15.

47Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, p. 8.

48Link to the location of the note in the document
Plaintiff's Response, Docket Entry No. 25, p. 25.

49Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, Docket Entry No. 18, p. 9.

50Link to the location of the note in the document
28 U.S.C. § 1391(b) states:

(b) Venue in general.--A civil action may be brought in--

(1) a judicial district in which any defendant resides, if all defendants are residents of the State in which the district is located;

(2) a judicial district in which a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred, or a substantial part of property that is the subject of the action [*26]  is situated; or

(3) if there is no district in which an action may otherwise be brought as provided in this section, any judicial district in which any defendant is subject to the court's personal jurisdiction with respect to such action.

51Link to the location of the note in the document
See Horne Declaration, Exhibit A to Defendant's Reply, Docket Entry No. 31-1, p. 6 ¶ 15 ("I was presented with and was required to sign the agreement attached to Fintech's Complaint in this case. I was told no changes would be made to it and I signed it as drafted by CrossVerify and/or Fintech."). Nowhere in Plaintiff's Complaint, Response, or Surreply does it dispute that Plaintiff drafted the Agreement.

52Link to the location of the note in the document
Agreement, Exhibit A to Complaint, Docket Entry No. 1-2, p. 10 ¶ 12.

 I. Introduction
Plaintiffs Denis Marc Audet, Michael [*2]  Pfeiffer, Dean Allen Shinners, and Jason Vargas (the "Plaintiffs"), individually and on behalf of a class of all others similarly situated, have filed suit against defendants Stuart A. Fraser ("Fraser"), GAW Miners, LLC ("GAW Miners"), and ZenMiner, LLC ("ZenMiner" together with GAW Miners, the "Companies") alleging violations of both federal and state securities law. Fraser has moved to dismiss all counts against him. For the reasons set forth below, his motion to dismiss is DENIED.



II. The Amended Complaint
This case involves an alleged scheme to defraud customers and investors in a series of business ventures related to "virtual currency mining," which the amended complaint describes as the "appli[cation] of computer power in an attempt to solve complex equations that verify a group of transactions in [a] virtual currency [such as Bitcoin]. The first computer (or collection of computers) to solve an equation is awarded new units of that virtual currency." (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 3.) The "people and computer equipment used in this process are known as miners." (Id.) The following facts are taken from the amended complaint and are accepted as true for the purpose of deciding Fraser's motion to dismiss. [*3] 



A. Factual Allegations

1. Garza and Fraser Meet and Form Several Business Ventures
Fraser, the vice-chairman of Cantor Fitzgerald, an investment bank, and Homero Joshua Garza ("Garza") first met in 2003 when Garza was in high school. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 33.)1Link to the text of the note Fraser had hired Garza to install internet service at his vacation home in Vermont. (Id.) Following this meeting, "[t]he two quickly developed a close business and personal relationship" with Garza looking to Fraser for "business advice, direction, and mentorship." (Id.) Over the next decade, Fraser "served as a mentor and business associate of Garza." (Id. at ¶ 18.) They formed several businesses together, including Great Auk Wireless High Speed Internet (later known as GAW High Speed Internet or GAW-HSI). (Id. at ¶ 36.) Although they "rarely formalized their business relationships," they had an understanding that Garza "would serve as CEO of their respective companies, and Fraser would serve as the 'Board.'" (Id. ¶ 34.) In their respective roles, the two frequently discussed, and made decisions concerning, the day-to-day operations of their businesses. (Id. ¶ 19-20.) Fraser also served as a financial investor in the companies. (Id. at ¶ [*4]  40.) "Unlike a traditional investor," Fraser "kept Garza on a tight least by doling out investments in piecemeal installments" and would withhold additional funding until Garza had reported back to him. (Id.)

In July 2013, Garza emailed Fraser to discuss their business relationship, which "had not been revised for years." (Id. at ¶ 37.) "Garza proposed that they split every system and company in half with the exception of GAW High Speed Internet, of which Fraser would own 80%." (Id.) Garza also suggested that they create "an equal partnership (50/50) in [their] holding company[,] Geniuses at Work Corporation, with Fraser holding the voting power." (Id.) Under Garza's proposal, he "would contribute his stake or control over certain systems or companies, as well as patents to be created." (Id.) For his part, Fraser would: (i) "provide a $10,000 per month investment that would serve as Garza's salary," (ii) "forgive a $230,000 personal debt," (iii) "allow Garza to live down the investment Fraser made in GAW in the past," (iv) "contribute a $150,000 cash infusion," and (v) assist in obtaining the support of Howard Lutnick, the head of Cantor Fitzgerald. (Id.) Fraser agreed to Garza's proposal, [*5]  and the two also agreed that their agreement "providing for 50-50 ownership would apply prospectively to new companies they created." (Id. at ¶ 38.)



2. GAW Miners and ZenMiner
In March 2014, Garza incorporated GAW Miners to sell virtual currency mining equipment. (Id. at ¶¶ 46, 75.) Fraser and Garza each owned half of GAW Miners consistent with their 2013 agreement. (Id. at ¶ 48.) In this new venture, as with their prior ones, Garza served as GAW Miners' CEO while Fraser "served as a de facto Board" and financial investor. (Id. at ¶¶ 46-47.) Fraser invested $135,000 in GAW Miners, which he supplemented a few months later in the summer of 2014 with three loans of $200,000 each. (Id. at ¶ 47.) At its inception, GAW Miners' primary business was the sale of virtual currency mining equipment. (Id. at ¶ 75.) GAW Miners expanded its business to include: (i) hardware-hosted mining, whose customers were told that they had purchased specific pieces of physical mining equipment that were stored and maintained by GAW Miners for daily maintenance fees, but allegedly controlled by customers; (ii) cloud-hosted mining, which purportedly allowed customers "to control their mining hardware through a website;" [*6]  (iii) investment contracts called Hashlets that paid returns on GAW Miners' virtual currency mining; (iv) GAW Miners' own virtual currency, Paycoin; and (v) investment contracts called HashStakers that held Paycoins and paid holders a fixed return. (Id. at ¶¶ 4-8.) According to the amended complaint, each of these services was fraudulent, largely because GAW Miners did not own all the computer hardware and associated computing power it marketed to its customers. (Id.) The allegations of the complaint describing each of these products are set forth in more detail below.



i. Hardware-Hosted Mining
Due to low profit margins on selling physical equipment, in June 2014, GAW Miners began offering its customers Hardware-Hosted Mining. (Id. at ¶ 77.) This service provided that, in exchange for a fee paid by customers to cover maintenance expenses, GAW Miners would host customers' mining equipment at its own datacenter. (Id.) GAW Miners told its customers they could access and control their mining equipment via remote management software offered by ZenMiner, a company co-owned by Fraser and Garza. (Id. at ¶¶ 38, 77-78, 85.) GAW Miners also represented to its customers that, at the customers' request, [*7]  GAW Miners would terminate the hosted mining services and ship to them the physical mining equipment. (Id. at ¶ 81.) But GAW Miners "never had sufficient designated equipment to return to customers." (Id.)



ii. Cloud-Hosted Mining
In July 2014, GAW Miners began offering Cloud-Hosted Mining. (Id. at ¶ 79.) Cloud-Hosted Mining gave customers "the option to engage in hosted mining without the ZenMiner software." (Id.) The service allowed customers to purchase mining hardware from GAW Miners and then house that equipment at ZenMiner's datacenters for a fee. (Id.) Customers could then control their purchased mining equipment by "logging on to accounts they established on ZenMiner's website interface called ZenCloud." (Id.) ZenCloud users could only mine in one of the pools offered on ZenCloud's website. (Id. at ¶ 80.) Further, under this service, GAW Miners represented that customers could terminate their "hosted services at any time and receive their physical equipment in the mail from GAW Miners." (Id. at ¶ 81.) But "no mining actually occurred through ZenMiner's ZenCloud interface" and "very few pieces of mining equipment purchased by customers actually existed" at ZenMiner. (Id. at ¶ 89.) [*8] 



iii. Hashlets
In August 2014, GAW Miners and ZenMiner decided to sell Hashlets, a concept that Fraser had initially proposed to Garza in May 2014. (Id.at ¶ 95-96.) A hashlet "entitled an investor to a share of the profits that GAW Miners and/or ZenMiner would purportedly earn by mining virtual currencies that were maintained in their data centers." (Id. at ¶ 95.) Unlike customers of Hardware-and Cloud-Hosted Mining, Hashlet customers did not acquire rights in a specific piece of mining equipment. (Id. at ¶ 97.) "Hashlets were purported to earn a return based on the number of virtual currency units generated when the pools to which their computing power was directed succeeded in processing and confirming virtual currency transactions." (Id. at ¶ 95.) GAW Miners told Hashlet customers that "they could log on to their ZenCloud accounts, activate their Hashlets using a code that was provided at the time of purchase, and then direct their Hashlets to engage in mining in one of the mining pools available through ZenCloud." (Id. at ¶ 100.)

"During their first week of availability alone, GAW Miners and ZenMiners oversold—between triple and quadruple—the number of hashlets for which they had the [*9]  supporting computing power." (Id. at ¶ 107.) "By October 2014, GAW Miners had oversold altcoin-mining Hashlets by at least 100 times its computing capacity, and bitcoin-mining Hashlets by at least about 5 times its computing capacity." (Id. at ¶ 108.) "These sales took place before GAW Miners had even completed setting up the datacenter in Mississippi where the mining equipment was purportedly stored." (Id.) Between "mid-August and December 2014, GAW Miners and ZenMiner sold at least $19 million of Hashlets to more than 10,000 investors." (Id. at ¶ 109.)



iv. Paycoin
In November 2014, GAW Miners announced its plans to launch a new form of virtual currency called "Paycoin." (Id. at ¶ 136.) In advance of the launch of Paycoin, GAW Miners offered customers Hashpoints, which "were convertible promissory notes that could be purchased or mined and exchanged for Paycoin once Paycoin launched." (Id. at ¶ 136.) GAW Miners and Garza represented to customers that "Paycoin would have an estimated value of $80-$100 per coin" and that Paycoin's price would not fall below a $20 price floor. (Id. at ¶¶ 139, 142.) They also represented that "banks and investment firms were standing in line to support [*10]  Paycoin and were financially backing it" and that merchants were widely adopting it. (Id. at ¶¶ 140, 141.)



v. HashStakers
HashStakers were digital wallets designed to hold Paycoin. (Id. at ¶ 151.) Paycoins deposited in HashStakers "had an inherent lockup period of 30, 90, or 180 days." (Id.) They functioned as "fixed-rate investment vehicles and they yielded a daily payout." (Id. at ¶152) Their purchase price was based in part on the $20 Paycoin floor. (Id. at ¶ 153.) Paycoin, however, traded below that price floor because it was traded on other virtual currency exchanges, not just Paybase, the virtual currency exchange that GAW Miners and Garza had developed to "control trading and manipulate" the value of Paycoin. (Id.) The fact that it was traded on other exchanges and that Paybase did not become operational until much later than originally anticipated led the price of Paycoin to drop "precipitously." (Id. at ¶ 156.) GAW Miners' customers "began to realize that not only were the purchased HashStakers too expensive, compared to the current price of Paycoin on the exchanges, but their locked Paycoins were losing value with a negative net-effective rate of return." (Id.)

According to [*11]  the amended complaint, "[t]he design of HashStakers was intentional; Garza and Fraser wanted their customers' Paycoins to be locked up for the longest period of time possible... Once Paycoins were locked in interest-bearing investment wallets, the coins could not be dumped on the exchanges, depressing the market price of Paycoin." (Id. at ¶ 157.) Further, "[b]ecause Garza ensured that GAW Miners' customers' Paycoins were locked in 30, 90, or 180-day HashStakers, the defendants were able to dump the more than 12 million Paycoins they secretly pre-mined—and falsely claimed to have destroyed—and reap the benefits of artificially inflated prices for Paycoin while GAW Miners' customers watched the value of their own Paycoins and HashStakers plummet." (Id.)



3. Alleged Misrepresentations
The amended complaint provides the following examples of misrepresentations allegedly made by the "defendants":

i. "that Hardware-Hosted Mining and Cloud-Hosted Mining customers could request shipment of the physical mining equipment they purportedly owned";

ii. "that Hardware-Hosted Mining and Cloud-Hosted Mining customers could control the pools in which their mining equipment operated";

iii. "that all of the Hashlets of [*12]  computing power purchased by investors would be pooled together to engage in virtual currency mining, and that investors' returns, or 'payouts,' would be calculated based on the success of those collective virtual currency mining operations";

iv. "that buying a Hashlet would allow investors to mine virtual currency without the expense and expertise that would be required to purchase and maintain their own virtual currency mining equipment";

v. "the profitability and life-span of Hashlets";

vi. "how the payouts for Hashlets were derived";

vii. "the value of Hashpoints and the conversion to Paycoin";

viii. "the expected value of Paycoin and the existence of agreements with merchants to accept it";

ix. "the utility of Paybase as a GAW Miners-owned exchange for Paycoin";

x. "the continued existence of defendants' pre-mined Paycoin and defendants' sales of that Paycoin without customer knowledge";

xi. "the expected returns generated by HashStakers";

xii. "the extent of GAW Miners' mining activities"; and

xiii. "the extent of GAW Miners' virtual currency trading activities."

(ECF No. 57 at ¶ 9.)


4. Fraser's Role
Fraser had a "deep involvement with Garza and GAW Miners." (Id. at ¶ 72.) Fraser participated [*13]  in "in GAW Miners' operations and strategic decision-making, and regularly provided direction to Garza concerning GAW Miners' business." (Id. at ¶ 50.) For example, he advised Garza on (i) GAW Miners' exchange rate risk, (ii) potential retail platforms to market GAW Miners' products, and (iii) potential acquisitions. (Id.) Fraser also served as a contact for potential investors interested in either purchasing GAW Miners' products, or working with GAW Miners. (Id. at ¶ 62.) Fraser could play that role because Garza kept him apprised of GAW Miners' status and granted him access to GAW Miners' business records. (Id. at ¶¶ 62-63, 70.) He also negotiated with third parties on GAW Miners' behalf. (Id. at ¶ 51.) On one such occasion, in April 2014, GAW Miners was negotiating with Zeus Miner, a manufacturer of equipment for cryptocurrency mining, and "Fraser negotiated directly with the CEO of Zeus Miner on behalf of GAW Miners." (Id.) Furthermore, Fraser "participated in the management and direction of GAW Miners' advertising strategy." (Id. at ¶ 52.) In that capacity, Fraser created a Twitter account to market and promote GAW Miners' business and products. (Id. at ¶ 54.) He also allowed [*14]  "Garza and GAW Miners to use [his] credit line at Bank of America and his American Express Plum card for GAW Miners['] company business." (Id. at ¶ 72.)

Fraser also leveraged his resources at Cantor Fitzgerald for GAW Miners. He used Cantor Fitzgerald personnel in any array of capacities including "respond[ing] to media inquiries about GAW Miners, [] provid[ing] administrative support, and [] handl[ing] accounting or legal issues related to GAW Miners." (Id. at ¶ 59.) He also "used his contacts at Cantor Fitzgerald" to "introduce potential investors to Garza and GAW Miners." (Id. at ¶ 55.)

******

Additional factual allegations are recounted as necessary below.



B. Legal Claims
Plaintiffs make the following claims in their amended complaint.



1. GAW Miners and ZenMiner
Plaintiffs sue GAW Miners and ZenMiner for (i) violation of Section 10(b) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act"), 15 U.S.C. § 78j(b), and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (count one), (ii) violations of Sections 36b-29(a)(2) and 36b-4 of the Connecticut Uniform Securities Act ("CUSA") (count three), (iii) violation of Section 36b-29(a)(1) of CUSA (count five), and (iv) common law fraud (count seven).



2. Fraser
Plaintiffs sue Fraser for: (i) controlling person liability under Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act (count two), (ii) aiding and abetting fraud [*15]  in violation of Section 36b-29(a)(2) of CUSA (count four), (iii) controlling person liability under of Section 36b-29(c) of CUSA (count six), and (iv) aiding and abetting common law fraud (count eight).



III. Applicable Legal Standards

A. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6)
In deciding a motion to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), I must determine if the Plaintiffs have alleged "enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). "A claim has facial plausibility when the pleaded content allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). At this stage, a court construes the complaint liberally, "accepting all factual allegations in the complaint as true, and drawing all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff's favor." Chambers v. Time Warner, Inc., 282 F.3d 147, 152 (2d Cir. 2002)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). "[A] formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do." Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929.



B. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
"Any complaint alleging securities fraud must satisfy the heightened pleading standards of the [Private Securities Litigation Reform Act ("PSLRA")] and Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b) by stating with particularity the circumstances constituting fraud." ECA, Local 134 IBEW Joint Pension Trust of Chicago v. J.P. Morgan Chase Co., 553 F.3d 187, 196 (2d Cir. 2009)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). [*16]  "Under the PSLRA, the complaint must specify each statement alleged to have been misleading, and the reason or reasons why the statement is misleading and state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind." Id. (internal quotation marks, alterations, and citations omitted). "To determine whether the plaintiff has alleged facts that give rise to the requisite strong inference of scienter, a court must consider, plausible, nonculpable explanations for the defendant's conduct, as well as inferences favoring the plaintiff." Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues & Rights, Ltd., 551 U.S. 308, 324, 127 S. Ct. 2499, 168 L. Ed. 2d 179 (2007)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). While reasonable inferences are normally drawn in favor of the non-movant on a motion to dismiss, "the PSLRA establishes a more stringent rule for inferences involving scienter because the PSLRA requires particular allegations giving rise to a strong inference of scienter." ECA, Local 134 IBEW, 553 F.3d at 196 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). And the particularity requirement of Rule 9(b)"requires that a plaintiff set forth the who, what, when, where and how of the alleged fraud." U.S. ex rel. Polansky v. Pfizer, Inc., 04-CV-0704 (ERK), 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43438, 2009 WL 1456582, at *4 (E.D.N.Y. May 22, 2009)(internal [*17]  quotation marks and citations omitted).



IV. Discussion

A. The Control Person Liability Claim under Section 20(a) (Count Two)
Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act provides that:

[e]very person who, directly or indirectly, controls any person liable under any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation thereunder shall also be liable jointly and severally with and to the same extent as such controlled person to any person to whom such controlled person is liable, unless the controlling person acted in good faith and did not directly or indirectly induce the act or acts constituting the violation or cause of action.

15 U.S.C. § 78t. "To state a claim of control person liability under §20(a), a plaintiff must show (1) a primary violation by the controlled person, (2) control of the primary violator by the defendant, and (3) that the defendant was, in some meaningful sense, a culpable participant in the controlled person's fraud." Carpenters Pension Tr. Fund of St. Louis v. Barclays PLC, 750 F.3d 227, 236 (2d Cir. 2014)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Because the parties do not dispute the first element for purposes of the motion to dismiss, I examine whether amended complaint sufficiently alleges the remaining two elements below.


1. Control
The Second Circuit has adopted the definition of control promulgated [*18]  by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"): Control is "'the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of [the primary violators,] whether through [the] ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise.'" SEC v. First Jersey Sec., Inc., 101 F.3d 1450, 1472-73 (2d Cir. 1996)(quoting 17 C.F.R. § 240.12b-2; emphasis added). "The test of whether an individual is a controlling person for the purposes of § 20(a) is not a categorical one that turns solely on the individual's status as an officer or director. Rather, the inquiry is a functional one, as SEC regulations indicate." In re Complete Management Inc., Sec. Litig., 153 F. Supp. 2d 314, 331 (S.D.N.Y. 2001)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted); see also Patriot Exploration, LLC v. SandRidge Energy, Inc., 951 F. Supp. 2d 331, 362 (D. Conn. 2013)("A person's status as an officer, director, or shareholder, absent more, is not enough to trigger liability under [section 20(a)]...")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Thus, control is adequately pled when there are factual allegations that "support a reasonable inference that defendants had the potential power to influence and direct the activities of the primary violator." Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Those allegations need not satisfy the PSLRA. Poptech, L.P., v. Stewardship Credit Arbitrage Fund, LLC, 792 F. Supp. 2d 328, 334 (D. Conn 2011)("With regard to the control element,...[the] [c]omplaint need only satisfy the requirements of Rule 8(a).")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). [*19]  Because control "a fact-intensive inquiry," it "generally should not be resolved on a motion to dismiss." Patriot Exploration, 951 F. Supp. 2d at 362 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).

The amended complaint plausibly pleads that Fraser controlled the Companies and Garza. It does so first by alleging that Fraser owned half of the equity in each of the Companies — a well recognized indicator of control. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 48)("...Fraser and Garza each owned half of GAW Miners and ZenMiner."); see Szulik v. Tagliaferri, 966 F. Supp. 2d 339, 369 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)(finding control in part based on allegations that "each [defendant] held 50% interest"). To be sure, the amended complaint also alleges that Garza and Fraser "agreed to set aside 18% of the equity" for investors or employees (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 48), but as Plaintiffs point out, it does not say they actually did so. Nowhere does the amended complaint allege that the 18% was actually assigned to any other investor, and the right to reserve implies in any event control over the issuance of the stock. (ECF No. 63 at 17.) But even if Fraser was a minority owner, the amended complaint contains other allegations sufficient to plead Fraser's control.

First, the amended complaint alleges that Fraser was involved in directing both the [*20]  Companies' major strategic decisions and their daily operations. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 135)("Garza and Fraser made the decision that GAW Miners would offer and sell first Hardware-and Cloud-Hosted Mining and then Hashlets"); (Id. at ¶ 158)(alleging that Fraser and Garza made the decision that GAW Miners would offer and sell HashStakers and launch Paycoin); (Id. at ¶¶ 87-88)(alleging that "Fraser came up with the idea of GAW Miners acquiring ZenMiner, first proposed the plan to Garza in or around June 2014, and the two jointly made the decision for GAW Miners to acquire ZenMiner"); (Id. at ¶¶ 19-20)("...Garza and Fraser have controlled GAW Miners and directed its day-to-day activities....[They have also] controlled ZenMiner and directed its day-to-day activities."); (Id. at ¶ 50)(alleging Fraser's involvement at the Companies ranged from advising on potential acquisitions targets to recommending the use of e-commerce as a platform for the Companies' products to directing Garza to "look into []the [Companies'] exchange rate risk" posed by their foreign operations); (Id. at ¶ 51)("Fraser negotiated directly with the CEO of Zeus Miner on behalf of GAW Miners on at least one occasion and invited [*21]  the CEO of Zeus Miner to visit with Fraser about GAW Miners businesses in New York."); (Id. at ¶ 62)(alleging Fraser served as a one of the points of contacts at the Companies for parties seeking to purchase the Companies' products or to explore potential partnership opportunities) That Fraser allegedly not only had the ability to exercise control but actually exercised it goes beyond what is necessary to plead control. Cf. In re Parmalat Sec. Litig., 594 F. Supp. 2d 444, 456 (S.D.N.Y. 2001)("[O]nly the ability to direct the actions of the controlled person, and not the active exercise thereof is required to establish control.")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).

Second, the amended complaint alleges that Fraser and Garza had a close personal relationship, with Fraser as mentor and Garza as mentee. Together with the other allegations, this makes it plausible that Fraser, from whom Garza sought "advice and approval" before "making decisions concerning the management and policies of their businesses," had the potential to influence and direct the Companies. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 34); see also (Id. at ¶ 33)("Garza and Fraser have had a business and personal relationship since approximately 2003....The two quickly developed a close business and personal [*22]  relationship."); (Id. at ¶ 39)("Garza and Fraser's relationship went beyond an ordinary business relationship. Garza expressed his gratitude at one point by giving Fraser a Tesla (an expensive car). Fraser and Garza regularly went to one another's homes, spent time with one another's families and friends, and engaged in social activities together. Garza and Fraser also regularly sent each other text messages, often about social subjects and often include[ed] pictures of themselves..."); (Id. at ¶ 41)("Garza relied on Fraser for personal financial support."); see In re MTC Electronic Technologies Shareholder Litig., 898 F. Supp. 974, 984 (E.D.N.Y. 1995)("Plaintiffs have clearly alleged that Alan Leung had controlling status [] because of his family relationships with the two co-founders of MTC...")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted), vacated in part on other grounds at 993 F. Supp. 160 (E.D.N.Y. 1997); see also Drobbin v. Nicolet Instrument Corp., 631 F. Supp. 860, 885 (S.D.N.Y. 1986)(observing that fact that defendant was "personal attorney and long-time friend" weighed in favor of finding of control).

Third, Fraser appears to have been a major — and the amended complaint suggests the leading — creditor of GAW Miners and Garza, and one who used his financial leverage to oversee Garza. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ [*23]  37 (Fraser would provide $10,000 per month investment that would serve as Garza's salary, forgive a $230,000 personal debt from Garza, and contribute a $150,000 cash infusion); Id. at ¶ 40 ("...Fraser required Garza to report back to Fraser and receive his blessing before receiving additional financing.")); see Technology Exchange Corporation of America, Inc. v. Grant County State Bank, 646 F. Supp. 179, 183 (D. Colo. 1986)(finding control in part based on allegation that lender "only disburs[ed] loan proceeds for those expenditures it approved"); see also Szulik, 966 F. Supp. 2d at 369 (finding control in part based on allegation that defendant threatened to cut off funding to entity that was part of fraudulent scheme).

Fraser argues that the complaint merely alleges that he offered "suggestions" to Garza, but that Garza was "the ultimate decision-maker, actor and authority on the Companies, their products and their marketing." (ECF No. 62 at 12-13.) But this ignores the allegations of 50/50 ownership and joint control discussed above, and some allegations suggesting that it was Fraser who was the ultimate decision maker. See (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 34)("...Garza continued to seek advice and approval from Fraser before making decisions concerning the management and policies of their business.")(emphasis added); see also (Id. at ¶ 74)(Concerning [*24]  the purchase of a domain name, Fraser allegedly wrote Garza: "Do what you want. Seems like a huge waste of money to me. Sorry I don't just rubber stamp everything that comes out [] [sic] your mouth"). Fraser also argues that his access to information alone does not establish control. (ECF No. 62 at 14.) But I consider the allegations of access together with the allegations of other indicia of control to assess their combined impact. Patriot Exploration, 951 F. Supp. 2d at 362 (A "court must consider the total effect of various indicia of control in combination, rather than examining any one [indicator] in isolation.")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Collectively, the allegations in the amended complaint are sufficient to plead control "through ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise." 17 C.F.R. § 240.12b-2.



2. Culpable Participation
Culpable participation -- though a longstanding requirement of a Section 20(a) prima facie claim -- has been left undefined by the Court of Appeals. In re Initial Public Offering, 241 F. Supp. 2d 281, 394 (S.D.N.Y. 2003)("[T]he Court of Appeals [has]...never addressed the meaning of culpable participation")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). In that void, two approaches have emerged — one that views culpable participation as a state of mind requirement and [*25]  thus subject to the PSLRA and one that does not. Poptech, L.P., 792 F. Supp. 2d at 335 ("While some district courts have concluded that the culpable participation requirement is not a state of mind requirement, and thus need not comply with PSLRA, this Court respectfully disagrees.")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The former requires the plaintiff to "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with recklessness" - which may be demonstrated by pleading that the "controlling person knew or should have known that the primary violator was engaging in fraudulent conduct" or "ignored obvious signs of fraud." See, e.g., In re Alstom SA, 406 F. Supp. 2d 433, 491 (S.D.N.Y. 2005)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The latter requires the plaintiff to allege only control. See In re EZ Corp., Inc. Sec. Litig., 181 F. Supp. 3d 197, 212 (S.D.N.Y. 2016)(describing that under that standard "naked allegations of control will typically suffice")(internal quotation marks, alterations, and citations omitted). I need not resolve which approach governs this case because the amended complaint satisfies both.

The amended complaint pleads facts that Fraser was a culpable participant in GAW Miners' and Garza's fraud because he was aware of information that contradicted GAW Miners' public statements [*26]  about its services. It alleges that, in May 2014, Garza met with GAW Miners' CFO, Shiraz Moosajee. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 91.) The two "discussed the ZenCloud business model in detail, including the fact that there would be a mismatch between the Companies' mining capacity and customer orders and how customers would be paid" (Id.)(internal quotation marks omitted) - a fact that, based on other allegations that GAW Miners was selling more mining capacity than it actually owned and paying new customers with the fees paid by earlier customers rather than with the proceeds of mining activity, was a clear indicator of fraud. Following that meeting, Garza "took the materials from his meeting with Moosajee" and met Fraser at Fraser's home in Armonk, New York. (Id.) At that meeting, Garza "presented the same information he discussed with Moosajee," including the "fact there would be a mismatch between the companies' mining capacity and customer orders and how customers would be paid." (Id.) The amended complaint pleads that Fraser blessed the fraud after being presented with this information at the meeting at his home in Armonk: "Fraser told Garza that the ZenCloud looked great." (Id.) While knowledge [*27]  of the fraud may not be the only possible inference that might be drawn from these allegations, it is difficult to conjure other "plausible, nonculpabale explanations," Tellabs, 551 U.S. at 324 (emphasis added), for Fraser's blessing of the "mismatch" between mining capacity and customer orders, given the allegations about his overall understanding of the business model and how it was being advertised.

The amended complaint further alleges that in a June 10, 2014 email, Moosajee explained to Fraser and Garza that GAW Miners had "no operational system" for "[i]nventory accounting" and therefore "without supply chain operational controls, i.e.[,] purchases [sic] orders, goods received and dispatched notes & inventory, no reliance should be placed on any financial statements." (Id. at ¶ 66.) On October 10, 2014, according to the complaint, Fraser was copied on another email highlighting GAW Miners' inventory issues: in that email Garza allegedly wrote, "I cannot[sic] run the business like this. I need that million in order to buy the hardware necessary to fulfill the orders. This has taken too long, with unacceptable results." (Id. at ¶ 126.) These allegations are specific and, taken as true, give rise to the requisite "strong inference" [*28]  that Fraser acted at least with recklessness. Together with the allegations about the meeting at Fraser's home in Armonk, these allegations show that Fraser was aware that "GAW Miners never had sufficient designated equipment to support the hosted mining services they sold to customers or to ship to customers upon request" (Id. at ¶ 6) and, therefore, was aware of information that contradicted GAW Miners' public statements. This is enough for culpable participation in the alleged fraud. See In re Bristol Myers, 586 F. Supp. 2d at 172 (Defendants "both were aware of information which contradicted the Company's public statements that it would vigorously pursue the Apotex litigation and that a generic launch was at risk. These allegations...more than satisfy the requirement that the control person was a culpable participant in the fraud in some meaningful sense.")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).

The amended complaint also pleads that Fraser was a culpable participant because he allegedly "personally orchestrated" aspects of the fraud. (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 12.) For example, Fraser allegedly was the architect behind the phony acquisition of ZenMiner by GAW Miners. (Id. at ¶ 88)("Fraser came up with the idea of GAW Miners' [*29]  acquiring ZenMiner...") He also allegedly participated in the daily operations of the Companies and controlled "GAW Miners' strategic direction, and the content" of the transactions at issue. Compare (Id. at ¶¶ 135, 158); with In re Pfizer Inc. Sec. Litig., 584 F. Supp. 2d 621, 641 (S.D.N.Y. 2008)("Plaintiffs' allegation that McKinnell, LaMattina, and Katen participated directly in the day-to-day management of Pfizer and made strategic decisions is sufficient to meet Plaintiffs' pleading obligation as to culpable participation.")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted), abrogated on other grounds by 817 F.3d 393, 405 (2d Cir. 2016).

The allegations in the amended complaint, when accepted as true and taken collectively, are enough to create a strong inference that Fraser was at least reckless with respect to the Companies' and Garza's fraud. Tellabs, 551 U.S. at 326 ("In sum, the reviewing court must ask: When the allegations are accepted as true and taken collectively, would a reasonable person deem the inference of scienter at least as strong as any opposing inference?")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). While some allegations in the complaint may raise other inferences, the inference concerning Fraser's recklessness "need not be irrefutable, i.e.., of the smoking-gun genre, or even [*30]  the most plausible of competing inferences." Id. at 324 (internal quotation marks, citations, and alterations omitted). It need only be "strong in light of other explanations," id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted), and it is in this case.



B. State Law Claims

1. CUSA Aiding and Abetting Claim (Count Four)
Plaintiffs also sue Fraser under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(a)(2). The statute imposes liability on:

(a) Any person who:...(2) offers or sells or materially assists any person who offers or sells a security by means of any untrue statement of a material fact or any omission to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading, who knew or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known of the untruth or omission, the buyer not knowing of the untruth or omission, and who does not sustain the burden of proof that he did not know, and in the exercise of reasonable care could not have known, of the untruth or omission, is liable to the person buying the security,

Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(a)(2). To show a violation of the statute, a plaintiff must allege "in addition to...[a] primary violation,...that the aider and abettor...materially assist[ed] the primary [*31]  violator in the offer or sale of the securities and in the violation by which the primary violator accomplished the offer or sale..." Connecticut Nat. Bank v. Giacomi, 242 Conn. 17, 53, 699 A.2d 101 (1997)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
Here the Plaintiffs allege that Fraser "materially assisted Garza and defendants GAW Miners and ZenMiner [to] engage in their fraudulent course of conduct by: (1) providing capitalization and financing and business advice and direction; (2) proposing and directing that his son, Thomas Fraser, pose as the CEO of ZenMiner and that GAW Miners purport to purchase ZenMiner; (3) soliciting potential investors into the companies, informing potential investors about GAW Miners' investment products, and promoting GAW Miners' investment products; (4) providing resources from Cantor Fitzgerald and allowing Garza and the [C]ompanies to associate with the Cantor Fitzgerald brand; and (5) helping create the ZenCloud business model." (ECF No. 57 at ¶ 189.)

Citing Pearsall Holdings, LP v. Mountain High Funding, LLC, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 175056, 2014 WL 7270334, at * 6 (D. Conn. Dec. 18, 2014), Fraser argues that those allegations are insufficient to state a claim under the statute because Plaintiffs do not plead that Fraser made any untrue statement or omission and thus he cannot have materially assisted Garza and the Companies. (ECF No. 62 at 18.) While Pearsall [*32]  does suggest that the making of an untrue statement is required to "materially assist" a primary violator, applicable Connecticut Supreme Court precedent makes clear that it is not. In Connecticut National Bank v. Giacomi, 242 Conn. 17, 699 A.2d 101 (1997), the Supreme Court held that, under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(a)(2), "material assistance" consists of assistance that "has a natural tendency to influence, or was capable of influencing, the decision of the purchaser [of the security]." 242 Conn. at 52-53 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The court made clear that true statements — and even conduct unaccompanied by any statement — may satisfy this definition. See id. at 53 ("[a] seemingly innocuous oral communication not containing affirmative misrepresentations" may suffice "if it is used to emphasize, or induce reliance on, some other representation that is false or misleading"); id. at 54-55 (bank's conduct in giving investor fully endorsed note to sign showed bank's confidence in underlying investment scheme that was to be funded by investors' borrowing of purchase price of investments from bank). Accordingly, Fraser's argument that the amended complaint failed to plead a violation of Section 36b-29(a)(2) because it fails to allege an untrue statement by Fraser misapprehends the applicable law. And, as shown above, the [*33]  amended complaint pleads numerous facts suggesting that Fraser's public involvement with GAW Miners and Garza, together with Fraser's own position as a senior officer of a major investment bank, "ha[d] a natural tendency to influence, or was capable of influencing, the decision of the purchasers." Giacomi, 242 Conn. at 52-53.



2. CUSA Control Person Claim (Count Six)
Plaintiffs also sue Fraser under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(c). The statute imposes liability on:

(c) Every person who directly or indirectly controls a person liable under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, every partner, officer or director of such a person, every person occupying a similar status or performing similar functions, every employee of such a person who materially aids in the act or transaction constituting the violation and every broker-dealer or agent who materially aids in the act or transaction constituting the violation are also liable jointly and severally with and to the same extent as such person, unless the person who is so liable sustains the burden of proof that he did not know, and in exercise of reasonable care could not have known, of the existence of the facts by reason of which the liability is alleged to exist. There shall be contribution as in cases of contract among [*34]  the several persons so liable.

Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(c). Plaintiffs assert that Fraser is liable under the statute as a person who controls a primary violator, including a person "occupying a similar status or similar functions" as a director of the Companies, by virtue of his status as a both a partner and a de facto board member of the Companies. (ECF No. 63 at 41.) In Giacomi, the Connecticut Supreme Court explained that in assessing whether a person is liable as "a person occupying a similar status or performing similar functions" within the meaning of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(c), the "proper inquiry is whether a person occupies a status or performs functions similar to the status and function of a partner, officer, or director." 242 Conn. at 58 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted); see also id. at 61 (explaining that under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(c), "a party must occupy a status or perform a function similar to that of a general partner, or officer, or director in order to be held liable....)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Allegations of material assistance are not required for this theory. Id. (noting that CUSA "expressly creates two types of secondary liability for securities fraud: control person liability; and aiding and abetting liability. Control [*35]  persons such as partners, officers and directors logically fall under the control person heading. Employees, agents, and broker-dealers logically fall under the aider and abettor heading because of the additional requirement in those sections that one materially aid in the act or transaction that constitutes the violation")(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The amended complaint's allegations plainly support a claim under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36b-29(c). The amended complaint pleads not only that Fraser was a partner in the Companies and a de facto board member, it also alleges, as discussed above, that he was a culpable participant. Those allegations are more than sufficient to allege that Fraser was "a person [who] occupie[d] a status or perform[ed] functions similar to the status and function of a partner, officer, or director." Giacomi, 242 Conn. at 58 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).


3. Common Law Aiding and Abetting (Count Eight)
Fraser also seeks to dismiss Plaintiffs' claim against him for aiding and abetting the Companies and Garza in common law fraud. To state an aiding and abetting common law fraud, "a plaintiff must allege with particularity that: (1) the party aided by the defendant performed a wrongful act; (2) the [*36]  defendant generally was aware of his role as part of an illegal or tortious activity at the time he provided the assistance; and (3) the defendant knowingly and substantially assisted the principal violation." In re Colonial Ltd. Partn. Litig., 854 F. Supp. 64, 102-03 (D. Conn. 1994)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Fraser argues that the amended complaint's allegations do not show he knew or substantially assisted in the alleged fraud by Garza and the Companies. I disagree. The allegations discussed above showing that Fraser was a culpable participant for purposes of Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act are also sufficient to state a claim for aiding and abetting under the common law.



V. Conclusion
For the reasons set forth above, the motion to dismiss is DENIED.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

/s/ Michael P. Shea, U.S.D.J.

Dated: Hartford, Connecticut

October 11, 2017

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
The original complaint also named Garza as a defendant. Plaintiffs later dismissed their claims against Garza (ECF No. 52); according to Fraser, this was done after Garza agreed to provide them with information "in the hope that" such new information "could cure the deficiencies in [Plaintiffs'] claims against Fraser" in the original complaint. (ECF No. 62 at 5.). I. Background
Alibaba is a Cayman Islands company with its principal place of business in China. (Dkt. No. 1 ("Compl.") ¶ 2.) Alibaba is the parent company of "the largest online and mobile commerce group of businesses in the world." (Dkt. No. 19 ¶ 3.) In 2014, Alibaba set a world record for the most valuable initial public offering in history, and it is now the largest retail platform in the world. (Dkt. No. 19 ¶ 3; Dkt. No. 36-3 at 3.) Alibaba owns numerous registered federal trademarks for the mark "ALIBABA" (and [*3]  other related marks containing the word "Alibaba") for various uses related to computer and internet services. (Compl. ¶¶ 12-19, 20.)

Alibabacoin is the creator of a cryptocurrency. (Dkt. No 29-4 at 4.)1Link to the text of the note Alibabacoin has completed two "initial coin offerings," and is currently running a third, which it expects will raise over $3,5000,000. (Dkt. No. 18 ¶ 17.) Alibabacoin maintains a website ("the Alibabacoin website") at the URL https://www.abbcfoundation.com/, from which internet users can access marketing materials including a "white paper" describing Alibabacoin's vision for the future implementation of the Alibabacoin system. (Compl. ¶ 29-30; Dkt. No. 1-2.) For example, the white paper explains that "[t]he Alibabacoin Foundation will allow users to shop online by using their [Alibabacoin] wallet." (Dkt. No. 1-2 at 7.) Alibabacoin also maintains a website at the URL alibabacoinwallet.com ("the Wallet website") (Compl. ¶ 37), and offers phone applications through Google and the Apple App Store, respectively named "AlibabaCoin Wallet" and "Alibaba Coin Foundation Wallet" (Compl. ¶ 39-40.)

The trademarked term "Alibaba" appears on the Alibabacoin website (Dkt. No. 18-11.), on the [*4]  "Alibaba Coin Foundation" Facebook Page (Dkt. No. 1-28), on the Wallet website (Dkt. No. 1-29), and on the Alibabacoin website (Compl. ¶ 38.) The two apps also display the trademarked term "Alibaba." (Dkt. No. 1-30; Dkt. No. 1-31.)



II. Legal Standard
"[A] plaintiff seeking a preliminary injunction must show (1) 'a likelihood of success on the merits' or 'sufficiently serious questions going to the merits to make them a fair ground for litigation'; (2) 'that he is likely to suffer irreparable injury in the absence of an injunction'; (3) that 'the remedies available at law, such as monetary damages, are inadequate to compensate for that injury'; (4) that, 'considering the balance of hardships between the plaintiff and defendant,' a remedy in equity is warranted; and (5) that 'the public interest would not be disserved by the issuance of a permanent injunction." Can't Stop Prods., Inc. v. Sixuvus, Ltd., No. 17 Civ. 6513, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60313, 2018 WL 1684413, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 6, 2018) (brackets omitted) (quoting Salinger v. Colting, 607 F.3d 68, 79-80 (2d Cir. 2010)). "Although the holding in Salinger was explicitly 'limited to preliminary injunctions in the context of copyright cases,'" there is "no principled reason not to adopt the Salinger standard in the trademark context." Id. (alterations omitted) (quoting U.S. Polo Ass'n v. PRL USA Holdings, Inc., 800 F. Supp. 2d 515, 539 (S.D.N.Y. 2011)).

A district court is "powerless to proceed" on a [*5]  motion for preliminary injunction "in the absence of personal jurisdiction." Pablo Star Ltd. v. Welsh Gov't, 170 F. Supp. 3d 597, 611 (S.D.N.Y. 2016) (quoting Khatib v. Alliance Bankshares Corp., 846 F. Supp. 2d 18, 24 (D.D.C. 2012)). "In order to obtain a preliminary injunction, a plaintiff must make more than a 'prima facie showing of jurisdiction,'" and must instead demonstrate 'a reasonable probability of ultimate success' on the issue of personal jurisdiction." NewLead Holdings Ltd. v. Ironridge Glob. IV Ltd., No. 14 Civ. 3945, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80563, 2014 WL 2619588, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. June 11, 2014) (quoting Weitzman v. Stein, 897 F.2d 653, 659 (2d Cir. 1990)).



III. Discussion
Alibabacoin contends that a preliminary injunction is not warranted because: (1) Alibaba has not established subject matter jurisdiction under the Lanham Act; (2) Plaintiffs have failed to establish personal jurisdiction; and (3) Plaintiffs have failed to establish likelihood of success on the merits. (Dkt. No. 37 at 8, 13.)



A. Subject Matter Jurisdiction
Alibabacoin first argues that the Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction under the Lanham Act because Alibaba has not established that Alibabacoin ever made "use in commerce" of Alibaba's trademarks. (Dkt. No. 37 at 13.) According to Alibabacoin, no use in commerce has occurred at this point because it has yet to sell any Alibabacoins.

The Court concludes that it has federal question jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1338 because this case arises under the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a). First, "the 'use in commerce' element [*6]  of [15 U.S.C. § 1125(a)] is not a jurisdictional requirement." La Quinta Worldwide LLC v. Q.R.T.M., S.A. de C.V., 762 F.3d 867, 872 (9th Cir. 2014); see also Rescuecom Corp. v. Google Inc., 562 F.3d 123, 127 (2d Cir. 2009) ("[A] complaint fails to state a claim under the Lanham Act unless it alleges that the defendant has made 'use in commerce' of the plaintiff's trademark") (emphasis added); Sit N' Stay Pet Servs., Inc. v. Hoffman, No. 17 Civ. 116, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 143206, 2017 WL 3866026, at *4 (W.D.N.Y. Sept. 5, 2017) ("'[I]n commerce' is not a jurisdictional element of the Lanham Act.").

Second, Alibaba has adequately established that Alibaba used its trademarks "in commerce." Section 1127 provides:

The term "use in commerce" means the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary course of trade, and not made merely to reserve a right in a mark. For purposes of this chapter, a mark shall be deemed to be in use in commerce—

(1) on goods when—

(A) it is placed in any manner on the goods or their containers or the displays associated therewith or on the tags or labels affixed thereto, or if the nature of the goods makes such placement impracticable, then on documents associated with the goods or their sale, and

(B) the goods are sold or transported in commerce, and

(2) on services when it is used or displayed in the sale or advertising of services and the services are rendered in commerce, or the services are rendered in more than one State or in the United States and a foreign country and the [*7]  person rendering the services is engaged in commerce in connection with the services.

15 U.S.C. § 1127.
Alibabacoin argues that it has not yet sold any "coin on crypto-asset trading platforms." (Dkt. No. 37 at 13.) But Alibabacoin fails to explain why its three initial coin offerings do not constitute the sale in commerce of a "good" bearing Alibaba's trademark.

Accordingly, subject matter jurisdiction is proper over Alibaba's claims.



B. Personal Jurisdiction
Alibabacoin fares better on its personal jurisdiction argument. Because "personal jurisdiction in federal court is determined by the laws of the forum state," courts must perform a two-part jurisdictional analysis. Siegel v. Ford, No. 16 Civ. 8077, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 150147, 2017 WL 4119654, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 15, 2017) (quoting Machkour v. Espices W. 70th Corp., No. 11 Civ. 688, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 144797, 2011 WL 6288006, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 14, 2011)). "First, the court determines whether there is jurisdiction over the defendant under the relevant forum state's laws—in this case, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)." Grand v. Schwarz, No. 15 Civ. 8779, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61606, 2016 WL 2733133, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. May 10, 2016). Second, the court must ensure that its exercise of jurisdiction is consistent with the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution. See id.

Alibaba contends that Alibabacoin is subject to specific personal jurisdiction2Link to the text of the note under Section 302(a)(1) of New York's long-arm statute. (Dkt. No. 17 at 9.) "Under C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(1), a court in New York may exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-domiciliary if (1) defendant 'transacts any business within the state'; and (2) the 'cause [*8]  of action arises from' that business transaction." Grand, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61606, 2016 WL 2733133, at *3 (alterations omitted) (quoting N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(1)).

As to the first element, a nonresident defendant "'transacts business' in New York when she 'purposefully avails herself of the privilege of conducting activities within New York, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws.'" Id. (quoting CutCo Indus., Inc. v. Naughton, 806 F.2d 361, 365 (2d Cir. 1986)). "Whether a defendant engaged in purposeful activity within New York depends on the totality of the circumstances." Joint Stock Co. Channel One Russia Worldwide v. Infomir LLC, No. 16 Civ. 1318, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 29806, 2017 WL 825482, at *9 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 2, 2017) (quoting Universal Grading Serv. v. eBay, Inc., No. 08 Civ. 3557, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 49841, 2009 WL 2029796, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. June 10, 2009)).

Alibaba offers several arguments that Alibabacoin has transacted business in New York (Dkt. No. 17 at 9), but only two merit significant discussion. First, Alibaba contends that Alibabacoin's operation of a "highly interactive website," which is accessible to New York residents, constitutes transaction of business in the forum. (Id.) It is well established that a defendant's operation of a website can support personal jurisdiction under § 302(a). See M. Shanken Communs., Inc. v. Cigar500.com, No. 7 Civ. 7371, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 51997, 2008 WL 2696168, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. July 7, 2008). To determine whether jurisdiction is proper, courts must place the website on a "spectrum of interactivity":

At one end are 'passive'" websites—i.e., those that merely make information available to viewers. Such [*9]  websites have 'been analogized to an advertisement in a nationally-available magazine or newspaper, and does not without more justify the exercise of jurisdiction over the defendant.' At the other end of the spectrum are 'interactive' websites—i.e., those that knowingly transmit goods or services to users in other states. Where an 'interactive' website is not only available but also purposefully directs activity into a forum state—for example, by making sales of goods or services to New York residents—those activities can be sufficient to trigger jurisdiction under section 302(a)(1). Finally, 'occupying the middle ground are cases in which the defendant maintains an interactive web site which permits the exchange of information between users in another state and the defendant, which depending on the level and nature of the exchange may be a basis for jurisdiction.'

Royalty Network Inc. v. Dishant.com, LLC, 638 F. Supp. 2d 410, 418-19 (S.D.N.Y. 2009) (internal citations omitted) (first and third quoting Citigroup Inc. v. City Holding Co., 97 F.Supp.2d 549, 565 (S.D.N.Y. 2000); second quoting Mattel, Inc. v. Adventure Apparel, No. 00 Civ. 4085, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3179, 2001 WL 286728, at *2-3, (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 22, 2001).).
Here, Alibabacoin's websites are highly interactive and have "significant commercial elements." Seldon v. Magedson, No. 11 Civ. 6218, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 141616, 2012 WL 4475274, at *9 (S.D.N.Y. July 10, 2012) ("Interactive websites with significant commercial elements are generally found sufficient to constitute in-state transaction of business. . . .") Through the Alibabacoin [*10]  website and the Wallet website, individuals can (1) register an online account, or "wallet," to buy, manage, and sell their Alibabacoin; (2) access and download content about Alibabacoin's cryptocurrency, including the white paper; and (3) interact with and contact sales representatives with questions. (Dkt. No. 49 at 6; Dkt. No. 22 at 1-2.) In light of this functionality, these two websites are sufficiently interactive to support personal jurisdiction. See, e.g., Cigar500.com, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 51997, 2008 WL 2696168, at *5.

Nonetheless, Alibaba's cannot base jurisdiction on Alibabacoin's interactive websites because Alibaba has not established a reasonable probability that these websites have been "actually used to effect commercial transactions with customers in New York." Id. "Even the existence of an interactive 'patently commercial' website that can be accessed by New York residents is not sufficient to justify the exercise of personal jurisdiction unless some degree of commercial activity occurred in New York." ISI Brands, Inc. v. KCC Int'l, Inc., 458 F. Supp. 2d 81, 87-88 (E.D.N.Y. 2006) (quoting Savage Universal Corp. v. Grazier Constr., Inc., No. 4 Civ. 1089, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 16088, 2004 WL 1824102, *9 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 13, 2004)); see also Virgin Enterprises Ltd. v. Virgin Eyes LAC, No. 08 Civ. 8564, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 97280, 2009 WL 3241529, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 30, 2009) ("Because no business transactions supplemented the advertisements on Defendant's website, § 302(a)(1) cannot confer personal jurisdiction."); Buccellati Holding Italia SPA v. Laura Buccellati, LLC, 935 F. Supp. 2d 615, 622 n.3 (S.D.N.Y. 2013); Jewell v. Music Lifeboat, 254 F. Supp. 3d 410, 420 (E.D.N.Y. 2017). "It stretches the meaning of 'transacting business' to subject [*11]  defendants to personal jurisdiction in any state merely for operating a website, however commercial in nature, that is capable of reaching customers in that state, without some evidence or allegation that commercial activity in that state actually occurred." Savage Universal, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 16088, 2004 WL 1824102, at *9.

"Section 302(a)(1) is a 'single act statute' and proof of one transaction in New York is sufficient to invoke jurisdiction." Grand, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61606, 2016 WL 2733133, at *2-3 (quoting Kreutter v. McFadden Oil Corp., 71 N.Y.2d 460, 467, 522 N.E.2d 40, 527 N.Y.S.2d 195 (N.Y. 1988)). But Alibaba has not alleged that even a single sale of Alibabacoin has occurred in New York, much less presented sufficient proof of commercial activity to justify a preliminary injunction. Alibaba's evidence that the majority of visitors to the Alibabacoin website are based in the United States is insufficient, without more, to establish a reasonable probability that at least one New York sale has occurred.3Link to the text of the note

Alibaba also argues that personal jurisdiction is proper because Alibabacoin contracted with DigitalOcean LLC, a company headquartered in New York City, to host the Wallet website. (Dkt. No. 49 at 4.) Alibabacoin responds that any contacts it had with Digital Ocean fail at the second step of the § 302(a)(1) analysis because those contacts lack an articulable nexus to Alibaba's claims. (Dkt. No. 37 at 23.)

Business transactions [*12]  in New York do not give rise to personal jurisdiction under § 302(a)(1) unless the cause of action "'arise[s] from" those transactions. N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a). "A suit will be deemed to have arisen out of a party's activities in New York if there is an articulable nexus, or a substantial relationship, between the claim asserted and the actions that occurred in New York." Royalty Network, 638 F. Supp. 2d at 422 (quoting Best Van Lines, Inc. v. Walker, 490 F.3d 239, 246 (2d Cir. 2007)). "By contrast, 'a connection that is merely coincidental is insufficient to support jurisdiction.'" Id. (quoting Sole Resort, S.A. de C.V. v. Allure Resorts Mgmt., LLC, 450 F.3d 100, 103-04 (2d Cir. 2006)). "This inquiry is 'relatively permissive,' and does not require causation, but merely 'a relatedness between the transaction and the legal claim such that the latter is not completely unmoored from the former, regardless of the ultimate merits of the claim.'" Al Rushaid v. Pictet & Cie, 28 N.Y.3d 316, 329, 45 N.Y.S.3d 276, 68 N.E.3d 1, 11 (2016) (internal citations omitted) (quoting Licci v. Lebanese Canadian Bank, 20 N.Y.3d 327, 328, 984 N.E.2d 893, 960 N.Y.S.2d 695 (2012)). An articulable nexus exists where the claim is "in some way arguably connected to the transaction." Id. (quoting Licci, 20 N.Y.3d at 340).

The Court concludes that Alibaba has not shown a "reasonable probability" of establishing personal jurisdiction based on the fact that a New York company hosts Alibabacoin's website. Alibaba fails to cite a single case in which a court has concluded that an agreement with a third-party web-hosting company in New York [*13]  bears an articulable nexus to a trademark infringement claim involving a website. Even if Alibabacoin's websites were hosted in New York, that alone is insufficient to establish personal jurisdiction. See Philpot v. Kos Media LLC, No. 16 Civ. 1523, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 62135, 2017 WL 2270248, at *11 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 21, 2017) ("[T]he use of New York servers by defendant's web hosting vendor is 'merely coincidental,' and 'of no relevance to the facts or legal issues underlying this suit,' which concern the content of the website, not its architecture.") (first quoting Sole Resort, 450 F.3d at 103, second quoting Royalty Network, 638 F. Supp. 2d at 422), report and recommendation adopted, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 79229, 2017 WL 2269531 (S.D.N.Y. May 23, 2017)); see also BGDG Enterprises, LLC v. Barley & Swine, No. A-13 CA. 719, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199599, 2014 WL 12479650, at *4 (W.D. Tex. Jan. 23, 2014) (noting that no court has held that facts about "the servers hosting . . . websites and these servers' physical locations" were relevant to personal jurisdiction analysis); Amberson Holdings LLC v. Westside Story Newspaper, 110 F. Supp. 2d 332, 337 (D.N.J. 2000) ([D]efendants' only possible connection to New Jersey is a "host server" . . . . It is unreasonable that by utilizing a New Jersey server, defendants' should have foreseen being haled into a New Jersey federal court.")

Perhaps there are additional facts about Alibabacoin's relationship with Digital Ocean that would strengthen the nexus between their hosting agreement and Alibaba's claims. See Do The Hustle, LLC. v. Rogovich, No. 03 Civ. 3870, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10445, 2003 WL 21436215, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. June 19, 2003) (outlining relevant factors); see also Carefirst of Md., Inc. v. Carefirst Pregnancy Centers, Inc., 334 F.3d 390, 401-02 (4th Cir. 2003) (describing the significance of the location of web server within a forum [*14]  as "de minimis," but noting that jurisdiction could exist if an in-state individual had an active role in maintenance of defendant's site). Alibaba, however, has failed to allege that DigitalOcean had any sort of active role in administering Alibabacoin's site, nor has Alibaba alleged any other facts to strengthen the nexus between its claims and DigitalOcean's hosting of the website.4Link to the text of the note At this point, Alibaba has failed to meet its burden to establish that personal jurisdiction is proper by virtue of Alibabacoin's hosting agreement with DigitalOcean.

The Court briefly addresses Alibaba's other jurisdictional arguments under § 302(a)(1), which also fail to establish personal jurisdiction. First, Alibaba points to the fact that Alibabacoin plans to list its cryptocurrency on exchanges in the United States, including in New York. Alibaba relies on cases including Pinker v. Roche Holdings Ltd., 292 F.3d 361 (3d Cir. 2002), and Vancouver Alumni Asset Holdings Inc. v. Daimler AG, No., 16 Civ. 2942, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83621, 2017 WL 2378369 (C.D. Cal. May 31, 2017), to support its argument that Alibabacoin is subject to jurisdiction based on its anticipated presence on these coin exchanges.

This argument fails. First, those cases involve claims under the Securities Exchange Act, which "provides for nationwide service of process" and thus requires only that a nonresident has "sufficient [*15]  contacts with the United States, not any particular state" to establish personal jurisdiction. Vancouver Alumni Asset Holdings Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83621, 2017 WL 2378369, at *5 (emphasis added) (quoting Sec. Inv'r Prot. Corp. v. Vigman, 764 F.2d 1309, 1315 (9th Cir. 1985)) (quotation marks omitted). In contrast, "the Lanham Act does not provide for nationwide service of process," and therefore Alibaba must establish personal jurisdiction under New York's long-arm statute. Chanel, Inc. v. Doubinine, No. 04 Civ. 4099, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 77303, 2008 WL 4449631, at *1 (E.D.N.Y. Oct. 2, 2008). Contacts with the United States as a whole are not relevant to the question of specific jurisdiction under New York law.5Link to the text of the note

Second, Alibaba provides no support for the proposition that the New York long-arm statute covers Alibabacoin's purported intention to list its coins on New York coin exchanges at some point in the future. To the contrary, the fact that Alibabacoin contemplates offering Alibabacoin on New York-based coin exchanges is not sufficient to create personal jurisdiction under § 302(a)(1). Cf. In re Platinum & Palladium Antitrust Litig., No.14 Civ. 9391, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 46624, 2017 WL 1169626, at *46 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 28, 2017) ("[A foreign company's] presence on [the New York Mercantile Exchange], or any other domestic [over-the-counter] market or exchanges, fails to establish that it expressly aimed its conduct at the U.S. . . .") Indeed, in the securities context, "the prevailing caselaw accords foreign corporations substantial latitude to list their securities on New York-based stock exchanges [*16]  and to take the steps necessary to facilitate those listings . . . without thereby subjecting themselves to New York jurisdiction for unrelated occurrences." Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 226 F.3d 88, 97 (2d Cir. 2000). Alibaba offers no reason why cryptocurrency exchanges should be treated differently for purposes of jurisdiction.

Similarly, the fact that Alibabacoin uses U.S. dollars to project the value of its cryptocurrency and to quantify its market capitalization is insufficient to establish personal jurisdiction in New York. Cf. Atlantica Holdings, Inc. v. Sovereign Wealth Fund Samruk-Kazyna JSC, No. 12 Civ. 8852, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25217, 2018 WL 922191, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 15, 2018) (noting that defendants "denominated 80% of the securities" in question in U.S. dollars in a securities fraud case). Again, personal jurisdiction in securities cases turns on national contacts, but that is not the case for trademark suits.

Finally, the Court addresses § 302(a)(3)(ii) of New York's long-arm statute, which provides for personal jurisdiction where the defendant "commits a tortious act without the state causing injury to person or property within the state . . . if he expects or should reasonably expect the act to have consequences in the state and derives substantial revenue from interstate or international commerce." Jurisdiction under § 302(a)(3)(ii) has five elements:

(1) the defendant committed a tortious act outside New York; [*17]  (2) the cause of action arose from that act; (3) the tortious act caused an injury to a person or property in New York; (4) the defendant expected or should reasonably have expected the act to have consequences in New York; and (5) the defendant derived substantial revenue from interstate or international commerce.

Penguin Grp. (USA) Inc. v. Am. Buddha, 16 N.Y.3d 295, 302, 946 N.E.2d 159, 921 N.Y.S.2d 171 (2011).
At this stage, the Court cannot conclude that the existence of the third element—an injury in New York—is reasonably probable. Alibaba has not established "a non-speculative and direct New York-based injury to its intellectual property rights." Pablo Star, 170 F. Supp. 3d at 607 (quoting Troma Entm't, Inc. v. Centennial Pictures Inc., 729 F.3d 215, 220 (2d Cir. 2013)).

The New York Court of Appeals' analysis in Penguin is instructive: that case addressed the related question of how to determine the "situs of injury" in "copyright infringement cases involving the uploading of a copyrighted printed literary work onto the internet." 16 N.Y.3d at 301-02. The Court of Appeals held that the situs of the injury in such cases is "the location of the copyright holder," but it left open whether the same rule applies in copyright and trademark cases that do not allege "digital piracy." Id. at 302, 307 n.5; see also Forties B LLC v. Am. W. Satellite, Inc., 725 F. Supp. 2d 428, 434 n.9 (S.D.N.Y. 2010) (noting that "New York law is presently unsettled on the question of when copyright and trademark torts involving out-of-state [*18]  infringement cause injury to property within the forum state"). The Penguin court did, however, identify two critical factors relevant to its situs-of-the-injury analysis: (1) the unique jurisdictional problems posed by cases involving the internet, and (2) the nature of the "unique bundle of rights granted to copyright holders." 16 N.Y.3d at 304-05.

Here, as in Penguin, both factors point to the conclusion that the location of the trademark holder—in this case, China—is the situs of Alibaba's injury. First, the crux of Alibaba's claimed injury cannot be easily circumscribed to a specific location where it lost business: instead, "the alleged injury in this case"—i.e., Alibaba's loss of business, reputation, and goodwill—"involves online infringement that is dispersed throughout the country and . . . the world." 16 N.Y.3d at 305.

As to the second factor, in trademark cases and copyright cases alike, plaintiffs "suffer[] something more than . . . indirect financial loss" from infringement. Id. at 305. The paradigm harm in a trademark case—"public confusion as to source," Silverman v. CBS Inc., 870 F.2d 40, 48 (2d Cir. 1989)—is abstract, intangible, and often irreparable. See Malletier v. Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corp., 426 F.3d 532, 537 (2d Cir. 2005); Penguin, 16 N.Y.3d at 306.

Therefore, infringement of Alibaba's trademarks most likely causes Alibaba injury in China, its place of [*19]  business, in the form of reputational harm and loss of business and goodwill. See Int'l Diamond Importers, Inc. v. Med Art, Inc., No. 15 Civ. 4045, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 102257, 2017 WL 2839640, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. June 29, 2017) (applying the logic of Penguin to reach the same conclusion); see also Pablo Star, 170 F. Supp. 3d at 607 ("There is considerable authority for the proposition that 'the torts of copyright and trademark infringement cause injury in the state where the allegedly infringed intellectual property is held.'" (quoting McGraw—Hill Co. v. Ingenium Tech. Corp., 375 F. Supp. 2d 252, 256 (S.D.N.Y. 2005)) (alterations omitted).

It is also important to note that, in some cases involving infringement on websites, courts may still apply the logic of "traditional commercial tort cases to equate a plaintiff's injury with the place where its business is lost or threatened." Penguin, 16 N.Y.3d at 305. For example, in Energy Brands Inc. v. Spiritual Brands, Inc., the plaintiff was injured in New York by the defendants' trademark infringement because the "[d]efendants' goods were purportedly passed off and sold to New Yorkers who were actually or potentially confused as to their origin." 571 F. Supp. 2d 458, 471 (S.D.N.Y. 2008). "'Harm to a business in the New York market through lost sales or lost customers' may meet the requirement of injury in the forum state, but 'those lost sales must be in the New York market, and those lost customers must be New York customers.'" Elsevier, Inc. v. Grossman, 77 F. Supp. 3d 331, 346 (S.D.N.Y. 2015) (alterations and citation [*20]  omitted) (first quoting Energy Brands, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 467, second quoting Darby Trading Inc. v. Shell Int'l Trading & Shipping Co., 568 F. Supp. 2d 329, 336 (S.D.N.Y. 2008)).

Here, Alibaba has not demonstrated, or even alleged, that "its actual or potential New York customers were confused or deceived merely by viewing images of [its trademarks] on defendants' website[s]." Energy Brands, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 471. Besides the diffuse and derivative economic injuries of loss to business reputation and goodwill, which were analyzed above, Alibaba has failed to identify a specific economic injury in New York, see Overseas Media, Inc. v. Skvortsov, 407 F. Supp. 2d 563, 576 (S.D.N.Y. 2006), aff'd, 277 F. App'x 92 (2d Cir. 2008), nor has it alleged the existence of a New York market in which it lost actual or potential customers to Alibabacoin. To the contrary, Alibaba expressly disclaims any intention to enter the cryptocurrency market, in New York or anywhere else. (Compl. ¶ 54.) Without allegations of specific, non-speculative harm in the form of actual or potential injury in a New York market for its services, Alibaba cannot establish a New York-based injury under an economic tort theory.

In sum, Alibaba has not met its burden to establish a reasonable probability that the Court has personal jurisdiction over Alibabacoin.



IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff's motion for a preliminary injunction is denied, without prejudice to renewal upon an adequate [*21]  showing of personal jurisdiction, and the temporary restraining order is dissolved.

SO ORDERED.

Dated: April 30, 2018

New York, New York

/s/ J. Paul Oetken

J. PAUL OETKEN

United States District Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
"[C]ryptocurrencies purport to be items of inherent value . . . that are designed to enable purchases, sales and other financial transactions." (Dkt. No. 1-23 at 3.) Generally speaking, cryptocurrency coins or tokens are created and disseminated using distributed ledger or blockchain technology. (Dkt. No. 1-24 at 1.) Blockchain uses cryptography to process and verify transactions: it is essentially "an electronic distributed ledger . . . that is maintained by various participants in a network of computers." (Id.) Cryptocurrency coins or tokens are often sold in "initial coin offerings" ("ICOs"), in which purchasers may use fiat money or virtual currency to buy cryptocurrency coins or tokens. (Id.) ICOs are generally used by the companies marketing cryptocurrencies as a way to raise capital from investors. (Id.)

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Alibaba does not contend that Alibabacoin is subject to general personal jurisdiction in New York.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court also rejects Alibaba's alternative argument that personal jurisdiction over Defendants is proper under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 4(k)(2). (Dkt. No. 49 at 6-7.) To trigger Rule 4(k)(2), a defendant "must not be 'subject to jurisdiction in any state's courts of general jurisdiction.'" NewLead Holdings Ltd. v. Ironridge Glob. IV Ltd., No. 14 Civ. 3945, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80563, 2014 WL 2619588, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. June 11, 2014) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(k)(2). Even if Alibabacoin is not subject to jurisdiction in New York, Alibaba has provided no evidence that Alibabacoin is similarly not subject to jurisdiction in each of the other 49 states.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Alibaba relies exclusively on the fact that Digital Ocean is headquartered in New York. The Court notes that this fact alone is insufficient to establish that the Wallet website is even hosted on servers located in New York, especially given that Digital Ocean has "data center regions throughout the world." (Dkt. No. 22-2 at 2) The question whether Alibabacoin's Wallet website is actually hosted on servers physically located in New York may also be relevant to the personal jurisdiction inquiry. Rogovich, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10445, 2003 WL 21436215, at *6.

In its application for a preliminary injunction, Alibaba does not rely on § 302(a)(2), which provides for personal jurisdiction over a defendant who "commits a tortious act within the state." N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2). Alibaba's Lanham Act claims sound in tort. See Buccellati Holding Italia SPA v. Laura Buccellati, LLC, 935 F. Supp. 2d 615, 622 (S.D.N.Y. 2013). When infringement occurs on a website, "the tort is deemed to be committed where the website is created and/or maintained." DH Servs., LLC v. Positive Impact, Inc., No. 12 Civ. 6153, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14753, 2014 WL 496875, at *11 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 5, 2014) (quoting Citigroup Inc. v. City Holding Co., 97 F. Supp. 2d 549, 567 (S.D.N.Y. 2000)). Therefore, any tort arising from the infringing use of Alibaba's marks on a website occurred in the state where the server maintaining that site is located. See, e.g., A.W.L.I. Grp., Inc. v. Amber Freight Shipping Lines, 828 F. Supp. 2d 557, 571 (E.D.N.Y. 2011).

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Defendants' use of U.S.-based media and U.S.-based platforms, such as GoDaddy.com, Facebook, Youtube, and Twitter (Dkt. No. 17 at 10), is also irrelevant to the question of personal jurisdiction in New York. I. BACKGROUND

A. Allegations of the Complaint
Aaron Data Systems, Inc. ("ADSI") is a Florida corporation; it alleges that its principal place of business is in Florida. OZcoin, Inc. ("OZcoin") is incorporated in Texas; it alleges that its principal place of business is in Florida. Both Plaintiffs are internet-based companies and neither maintains a physical location (other than for mail receipt and corporate records storage) in the United States, or anywhere else.

Plaintiffs filed the instant Complaint (DE 1) in the Southern District of Florida. Plaintiffs assert claims for conversion, breach of fiduciary duty, and Deceptive and Unfair Trade Practices under Florida law, as well as for conspiracy and "aiding and abetting." They seek damages and injunctive relief against six defendants: GLD [*3]  International, Inc. ("GLD"), a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in New York; Citigold Corp., Ltd. ("Citigold"), an Australian company with its principal place of business in Australia; Johannes Breytenbach ("J. Breytenbach"), a New Zealand citizen with his primary residence in Queensland, Australia; Gregory Breytenbach ("G. Breytenbach"), a New Zealand citizen with his primary residence in New York; John Foley ("Foley"), an Australian citizen with his primary residence in Queensland, Australia; and Mark Lynch ("Lynch"), an Australia citizen with residences in Australia and the United Arab Emirates.

Defendant Foley sat on the board of directors of both Plaintiff OZcoin and Defendant Citigold. Defendant J. Breytenbach was named as an officer/director/Chief Technology Officer and a member of Plaintiff OZcoin's Executive Committee (DE 22-1). Defendant G. Breytenbach served as Plaintiff OZcoin's social media manager. Defendant Lynch was the CEO of Defendant Citigold.

According to the Complaint (DE 1), ADSI's principal, Terry Aronson (who holds dual United States and Australian citizenship), was approached by Foley about ADSI creating and leading a fundraising initiative [*4]  for Citigold. Aronson and Foley were long-time family friends from Australia. (DE 22-1). The Complaint alleges that ADSI conceived the concept of a 100% gold-backed cryptocurrency and created a licensed mobile app to build the cryptocurrency. ADSI's cryptocurrency and blockchain applications were developed and tested by programmers in Switzerland and the United Kingdom (DE 22-1, ¶ 5). At a meeting that took place in Australia, ADSI proposed utilizing gold assets owned by Citigold as collateral for the cryptocurrency (DE 34). ADSI and Citigold proceeded to execute an agreement (DE 1, ¶ 46), again in Australia, pursuant to which ADSI formed an affiliate, OZcoin, to market and promote the gold-backed cryptocurrency. (DE 1, ¶ 47).

After obtaining a license from ADSI to use its cryptocurrency technology, OZcoin and Citigold entered into a Gold Certificates and Security Agreement (DE 1-11) that granted OZcoin a collateral security lien over 100,000 ounces of gold owned by Citigold; this gold formed the backing for OZcoin's cryptocurrency. The gold would be purchased by OZcoin, mined by Citigold, and stored at the Perth (Australia) Mint with OZcoin holding gold certificates issued by the Perth [*5]  Mint (DE 1-11). Known as OzcoinGold ("OzGLD"), the gold-backed cryptocurrency was launched on March 10, 2017, with a promotion at the 2017 South by Southwest Conference and Festivals ("SXSW") in Austin, Texas.

In late April 2017, relations between OZcoin and Citigold began to deteriorate when Defendant Lynch, at a meeting in Australia, proposed an operating agreement that allegedly differed in substantial fashion from the parties' prior agreements. According to Plaintiffs, matters deteriorated further when, in May 2017, Defendants Foley and J. Breytenbach met in Australia and illegally removed Aronson as an officer of OZcoin and orchestrated an allegedly fraudulent release of OZcoin's security interest in Citigold's 100,000 ounces of gold. Simultaneously, Foley, J. Breytenbach, and Lynch "surreptitiously plotted to incorporate a separate entity to launch a cryptocurrency clone of OZcoinGold called CryptoGLD." (DE 1, ¶ 105). Defendant GLD International, Inc., was allegedly formed under Delaware law for the alleged purpose of operating CryptoGLD. (DE 1, ¶¶ 1-5, 110).

CryptoGLD was launched in June 2017, "declaring itself 'the World's First 100% Gold-Backed Cryptocurrency'" (DE 1, ¶ 112). [*6]  CryptoGLD is allegedly based on the same technology as that developed by ADSI. Citigold allegedly announced that it had terminated its previous gold purchase agreement with ADSI and, instead, entered into a gold purchase agreement with GLD International. Plaintiffs contend that Foley and J. Breytenbach were still serving as officers and directors of OZcoin and/or ADSI while engaged in direct competition with OZcoin through GLD International.



B. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss
Defendants move to dismiss the Complaint on the grounds of forum non conveniens and lack of personal jurisdiction. "[A] district court has discretion to respond at once to a defendant's forum non conveniens plea, and need not take up first any other threshold objection" including "whether it has authority to adjudicate the cause (subject matter jurisdiction) or personal jurisdiction over the defendant if it determines that, in any event, a foreign tribunal is plainly the more suitable arbiter of the merits of the case." Sinochem Int'l Co., Ltd. v. Malaysia Int'l Shipping Corp., 549 U.S. 422, 425, 127 S. Ct. 1184, 167 L. Ed. 2d 15 (2007). Accordingly, this Report and Recommendation addresses only Defendants' forum non conveniens argument.

Defendants argue that Australia is the appropriate forum because access to witnesses and documentary [*7]  proof is far superior in Australia than in Florida, because the plaintiff corporations have no presence (other than incorporation) in the United States, and because foreign law governs this action. Plaintiffs argue that Defendants do not satisfy the standard for dismissal for forum non conveniens because Plaintiffs' choice of forum is entitled to deference, because certain non-party witnesses reside in the United States or are willing to travel to the United States to testify, and because relevant documents in the custody of non-parties such as the Commonwealth Bank of Australia and the Perth Mint are actually under the "control" of at least one of the plaintiffs or defendants and, thus, are subject to production. Plaintiffs also dispute that the choice of law issue is determinative in identifying the appropriate forum for this case.



II. DISCUSSION

A. Forum Non Conveniens Standards
The doctrine of forum non conveniens allows a federal court to dismiss an action if a foreign court is a more appropriate and convenient forum for adjudicating a case. See Sinochem, 549 U.S. at 425. To obtain dismissal based on forum non conveniens, the moving party must "establish that '(1) an adequate alternative forum is available, [*8]  (2) the public and private factors weigh in favor of dismissal, and (3) the plaintiff can reinstate his suit in the alternative forum without undue inconvenience or prejudice.'" Tazoe v. Airbus S.A.S., 631 F.3d 1321, 1330 (11th Cir. 2011) (quoting Leon v. Millon Air, Inc., 251 F.3d 1305, 1310-11 (11th Cir. 2001)).



1. Adequate Alternative Forum
In evaluating Defendants' request for dismissal based on forum non conveniens, this Court first must consider (1) whether the alternative forum of Australia is adequate and (2) whether that forum is available. See Tazoe, 631 F.3d at 1330. An alternative forum is inadequate "only in rare circumstances where the remedy offered by the other forum is clearly unsatisfactory." Aldana v. Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., 578 F.3d 1283, 1290 (11th Cir. 2009) (internal quotation marks omitted). Such a remedy is insufficient when it is "no remedy at all." Piper Aircraft Co. v. Reyno, 454 U.S. 235, 254, 102 S. Ct. 252, 70 L. Ed. 2d 419 (1981); see Aldana, 578 F.3d at 1290. An alternative forum is available if the foreign court can assert jurisdiction over the litigation. See Leon, 251 F.3d at 1311. Generally, this requirement is met "when the defendant is 'amenable to process' in the other jurisdiction." Piper Aircraft Co., 454 U.S. at 254 n.22 (quoting Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501, 506-07, 67 S. Ct. 839, 91 L. Ed. 1055 (1947)).

Here, the parties do not dispute that Australia is an adequate forum for Plaintiffs' claims. Nor does the Court have any reason to doubt that the courts of that nation would offer Plaintiffs an adequate remedy. Defendant Foley, a licensed barrister in Queensland, Australia, filed an affidavit in support [*9]  of the Motion to Dismiss [DE 16]. Foley opined that the Supreme Court of Queensland is a common law court of unlimited jurisdiction, with proceedings conducted in English. He stated that he has "confidence that plaintiffs in the instant action can receive due process and a fair hearing in the Supreme Court of Queensland." (DE 16, ¶ 7). Indeed, the Gold Certificates and Security Agreement (DE 1-11) between Citigold and OZcoin expressly provides that the "agreement is governed by the laws of New South Wales, Australia, and the parties submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of that state." (DE 1-11 P2) (emphasis added). Having reviewed Foley's affidavit, the agreement of OZcoin to submit to the jurisdiction of the Australian courts, and the underlying law concerning forum non conveniens, the undersigned concludes that the requirement of an available, adequate alternative forum requirement is met. See Kolawole v. Sellers, 863 F.3d 1361, 1370 (11th Cir. 2017) (defendant satisfied the initial burden of establishing the availability of an adequate alternative forum through the affidavit of a Nigerian law professor who opined on the adequacy of relief available in a Nigerian forum).



2. The Presumption of Deference
"When a forum is both available [*10]  and adequate, courts proceed to analyze the private and public factors relevant to forum non conveniens." Kolawole, 863 F.3d at 1371. The first inquiry is "a determination as to the proper deference to afford the plaintiff's choice of forum: there is normally a 'strong presumption' that a plaintiff has chosen a convenient forum." Id. (citing Leon, 251 F.3d at 1314). The presumption is stronger when the plaintiff is a citizen of the United States, Wilson v. Island Seas Invs. Ltd., 590 F.3d 1264, 1269 (11th Cir. 2009), but weakens when the plaintiff is a foreign citizen. King v. Cessna Aircraft Co., 562 F.3d 1374, 1382 (11th Cir. 2009) (per curiam).

In this case, Plaintiffs are two corporations that are incorporated in the State of Florida and the State of Texas, respectively. Plaintiffs argue that their status as United States corporations grants them a strong presumption of deference. They argue that their presence in the United States is not a mere formality and that, in fact, they are American companies, employ American citizens in Florida, and operate and have their primary business in Florida.

Defendants respond that neither corporate Plaintiff has any physical presence in the United States and that the presumption of deference does not apply where a corporation's United States citizenship is merely a function of its place of incorporation. See U.S.O. v. Mizuho Holding Co., 547 F.3d 749 (7th Cir. 2008) (subsidiary of [*11]  a Japanese company not entitled to presumption of deference even though it was incorporated in Delaware). In U.S.O., the Seventh Circuit called the plaintiff's reliance on its state of incorporation a "veritable paroxysm of formalism." Id. at 751. The court explained:

The demands of a global economy require that American courts be amenable to permitting litigation that can be handled much more efficiently in foreign forums be sent to those forums. . . The fact that a Japanese company has a Delaware corporate certificate but not offices or personnel [] in the United States should not make it feel more at home litigating in Chicago than in Tokyo.

Id.
The undersigned agrees with the analysis by the Seventh Circuit and concludes that the deference afforded to Plaintiffs' choice of forum is minimal, at best. The plaintiff corporations were indeed incorporated in the United States and maintain a minimal presence in the United States. However, Plaintiffs have not presented evidence of measurable corporate activity in Florida, other than receipt of mail, storage of records, and the presence of two briefly tenured directors of OZcoin.1Link to the text of the note They are essentially companies that exist on the internet — in a sense, [*12]  in "the cloud." Plaintiffs have no storefront in this District, nor is there any evidence of their having servers in this District (or even, the United States), or employees that maintain their websites and databases. Aside from maintaining their records and receiving their mail in this District, these corporations have no more presence in this District than they do anywhere else in the world that receives free and open internet transmission. As the Seventh Circuit noted in U.S.O., Plaintiffs' lack of personnel or offices in this District should not imbue its choice to litigate in this forum with any measurable level of deference.

Furthermore, the very nature of this case militates against according Plaintiff's forum choice much, if any, deference. OZcoin was incorporated to implement a business deal that had minimal involvement in the United States. Indeed, in the end, this was a deal centered around Australian gold. And, as concerns the instant motion, the case involves Australian witnesses who can testify to the negotiations and transactions involving that gold and Australian documents that memorialize those transactions. ADSI developed the cryptocurrency program at the behest of [*13]  and for the fundraising needs of an Australian company. On the facts as alleged in the Complaint and in the various declarations that have been filed, the undersigned concludes that the place of incorporation of the Plaintiff corporations affords, at best, a weakened presumption of deference to Plaintiffs' choice of forum.

Yet, even if such a presumption were to be granted, the Court must still consider the private and public factors that ultimately determine the propriety of Plaintiffs' chosen forum. The fact that the Plaintiffs are American corporations certainly does not preclude dismissal for forum non conveniens. See Rosen v. Execujet Services LLC, 241 F. Supp.3d 1303, 1314 (S.D. Fla. 2017) (Marra, J.) (private factors supporting dismissal for forum non conveniens outweighed deference owed to United States plaintiff's choice of forum).



3. Private Interest Factors
Although the list is not exhaustive, "the private interests courts may weigh include the 'ease of access to sources of proof; availability of compulsory process for attendance of unwilling, and the cost of obtaining attendance of willing[ ] witnesses . . . and all other practical problems that make trial of a case easy, expeditious and inexpensive.'" Kolawole, 863 F.3d at 1371-72 (quoting Leon, 251 F.3d at 1314) (ellipses in original) (internal [*14]  quotation marks and citations omitted)). After considering the private factors raised by the respective parties, the undersigned concludes that trial of this case would be easier, more expeditious, and less expensive in Queensland, Australia.



a. Witnesses
First, most of the relevant witnesses reside outside of the United States, mostly in Australia. This Court, therefore, is without the authority to compel their attendance. Furthermore, even if this Court posessed such authority, the expense of bringing the witnesses to this District would be very high. Defendants and key witnesses Johannes Breytenbach, John Foley, and Mark Lynch reside in Queensland, Australia. And although Defendant Gregory Breytenbach is temporarily residing in New York State, he too is an Australian citizen with strong ties to that nation.

So too, critical non-party witnesses reside in Australia. Solicitor Philip Walton who resides in Syndey, New South Wales, Australia, has unique knowledge about the creation and release of the liens described in the Complaint; he also holds critical key original documents relating to the creation of and release of the security interests in the Australian gold. Solicitor Walton can [*15]  be served with process in New South Wales to appear in Queensland, but he cannot be compelled to appear in Miami, Florida. Although Plaintiffs proffer that they have secured his agreement to appear and have submitted a Declaration from Walton to that effect, the Court cannot rely on that Declaration to compel his appearance should he change his mind or should other matters arise precluding his travel from Australia to Florida.

Nial Nand is another critical witness who lives in Australia. Nand is the corporate secretary of Citigold who Plaintiffs allege signed fraudulent releases of OZcoin's security interests in the gold. Plaintiffs argue that because Nand is Citigold employee, Citigold can produce him for testimony. Nand, however, cannot be subjected to compulsory process by this Court. Plaintiffs' suggestion that critical witnesses would be willing to travel to Florida from Australia for testimony and trial is not sufficient; these witnesses cannot be compelled to attend.

Plaintiffs argue that the Florida residence of several witnesses — Terry Aronson, Ira Carlin, Terry Bresnick, Kirk Newsome, and Robert Dias -- militate in favor of their chosen forum and against litigating the case [*16]  in Australia. The undersigned is not convinced that these witnesses' presence in Florida warrants that the case be tried here. First, Terry Aronson holds Australian citizenship and admits that he "travels extensively" to Australia (DE 22-1, ¶ 2). Second, Carlin and Bresnick were associated with OZcoin for only two and one-half months, from February 17, 2017, when they were appointed to OZcoin's Board, to May 5, 2017, when they resigned. And, Plaintiffs have failed to proffer any unique testimony that would be offered by either Bresnick or Carlin.

Likewise, Plaintiffs have not attributed any substantive knowledge to Kirk Newsome that would qualify him as a critical witness. According to Aronson (DE 31-4), Newsome is a Texas-based attorney who was hired merely to prepare and file articles of incorporation for OZcoin. He helped Aaronson obtain certified copies of OZcoin's incorporation papers to send to the Perth Mint. Importantly, Plaintiffs proffer no knowledge of or participation by Newsome in the negotiations between the parties or the terms of the agreements between the parties beyond what he may have learned in his capacity as an attorney for OZcoin. In considering a forum non conveniens [*17]  motion, courts cannot presume that a witness's testimony is critical, absent an explanation of its significance. Rosen, 241 F. Supp.3d at 1310-11, n. 6 & 7. Plaintiffs have failed to provide any explanation that would support the conclusion that Kirk Newsome is a critical witness. See Online Payment Solutions Inc. v. Svenska Handelsbanken AB, 638 F. Supp.2d 375, 390 (S.D.N.Y. 2009) (overstated importance of witness' testimony adds no weight to private interest factor analysis).

Finally, it appears that Robert Dias, a retired IRS executive, is being proffered as a proposed expert on "good corporate governance." He has also prepared tax returns for ADSI and OZcoin. The Declaration (DE 22-2) submitted by Dias to the Court contains multiple levels of hearsay information. To the extent that he would testify as an expert on "good corporate governance," the undersigned notes that Plaintiffs have the option of either bringing him to Australia or, alternatively, hiring an expert in Australia. There is no showing that Dias is a critical witness whose presence in the United States would warrant litigating this Australian dispute in this District.



b. Documents
Beyond the presence of the critical witnesses in Australia, Defendants argue that much of the documentary evidence required for this case is held by non-parties in Australia, [*18]  such as the Walton Pitcher firm, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, and the Perth Mint. Documents from these entities are clearly beyond compulsory process from this Court. Plaintiffs' assertion that these entities are "technologically modern entities capable of easily providing the relevant documents" is beside the point; these entities cannot be compelled by this Court to produce the relevant documents. Furthermore, Plaintiffs have not shown that any party to this action has a legal right to obtain documents from these non-parties. "Under Fed.R.Civ.P. 34, control is the test with regard to the production of documents. Control is defined not only as possession, but as the legal right to obtain the documents requested upon demand." Searock v. Stripling, 736 F.2d 650, 653 (11th Cir. 1984).

Plaintiffs argue that the case should remain in this District because they may need to obtain the parties' email and website data through certain internet service providers (Google, Inc. and GoDaddy.com). This argument amounts to no more than speculation about both the need for and the ability to subpoena private account information from these ISPs and, therefore, is not persuasive.2Link to the text of the note

Finally, Plaintiffs note that Terry Aronson maintains their corporate records in the United [*19]  States, and, therefore, the case should be tried here. However, there is no issue of "control" or "custody" of the corporate Plaintiffs' records. Given Aronson's role as an officer of the Plaintiff corporations, those records can readily and easily be digitally transmitted to Australia.



c. Attorneys' Fees
Plaintiffs argue that Australian law does not permit contingent fee arrangements between attorneys and clients and, therefore, the financial burden to Plaintiffs in paying their attorneys should be considered as a private interest factor. (DE 31). However, the Eleventh Circuit has recognized that argument as "particularly weak," and noted that an alternative forum's lack of contingency fee arrangements or even trials by jury "should not significantly influence the forum non conveniens determination. . . ." Magnin v. Teledyne Continental Motors, 91 F.3d 1424, 1430 (11th Cir. 1996) (affirming a dismissal on grounds of forum non conveniens despite unavailability of contingency fees in France, the alternative forum).



d. Summary
In sum, this is a case about an agreement to use Australian gold as collateral for a cryptocurrency that was offered for sale via the internet. The private interests in this case — the production and availability of witnesses and documentary [*20]  evidence located in Australia, and the length and expense of travel to the United States — militate in favor of trying the matter in Australia. These private interests outweigh any level of deference that might be accorded Plaintiffs' choice of forum. See Rosen, 241 F. Supp.3d at 1314 ("Therefore, the Court concludes that the unfairness and undue burden to Defendants of trying the case in this District strongly outweigh Plaintiff's choice of a United States forum.").



4. Public Interest Factors
Notwithstanding that the private interest factors favor dismissing this action, the Court must still consider the public interest factors. SME Racks, Inc. v. Sistemas Mecanicos Para Electronica, S.A., 382 F.3d 1097, 1100 n.5 (11th Cir. 2004). The Eleventh Circuit has stated:

[a] court that rules on a motion to dismiss based on forum non conveniens must consider the following 'public factors,' which pertain to the relative interests of the two fora: [T]he administrative difficulties flowing from court congestion; the 'local interest in having localized controversies decided at home'; the interest in having the trial of a diversity case in a forum that is at home with the law that must govern the action; the avoidance of unnecessary problems in conflict of laws, or in the application of foreign law; and the unfairness of burdening [*21]  citizens in an unrelated forum with jury duty.

Tazoe v. Airbus S.A.S., 631 F.3d at 1333 (quoting Piper Aircraft, 454 U.S. at 241 n. 6) (internal quotations omitted).
The undersigned recognizes "that while this District has one of the busiest dockets in the United States, the court congestion factor is afforded little or no weight in the forum non conveniens analysis." Rosen, 241 F. Supp.3d at 1315 (citing Karl v. Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, Inc., 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 188840, 2014 WL 11906608, at *6 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2014).

As set forth in the discussion of the private factors, this is not a localized controversy. This case involves an agreement to market a cryptocurrency secured by gold that was mined, sold, and stored in Australia by an Australian company through an Australian mint. The majority of the actors in this case are Australian or have strong ties to Australia. The central documents were drafted and are stored in Australia. And most of the critical meetings occurred in Australia. Indeed, the entire transaction that forms the basis of the Complaint developed from a long-standing relationship between two Australian citizens. The public factor of having a localized controversy "decided at home" is simply inapplicable.

The next public factor, the avoidance of unnecessary problems in conflict of laws, weighs in favor of trying this case in Australia. In a diversity [*22]  case, a federal court applies the choice of law rules of the forum state. Trumpet Vine Investments v. Union Capital Partners, 92 F.3d 1110, 1115 (11th Cir. 1996). This Court, therefore, must make a separate determination on choice of law for each cause of action. Id.

The first two causes of action are for breach of fiduciary duty by Foley and J. Breytenbach, for, inter alia, their involvement in developing and acting on behalf of GLD International and Citigold while they were on the board of OZcoin. Count 3 asserts a claim of aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary duty against Defendants Lynch and Citigold. "Florida resolves conflict-of-laws questions according to the 'most significant relationship' test outlined in the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws." Grupo Televisa, S.A. v. Telemundo Communs. Group, Inc., 485 F.3d 1233, 1240 (11th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted). The parties agree that the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 309, commonly known as the "internal affairs doctrine" provides guidance:

The local law of the state of incorporation will be applied to determine the existence and extent of a director's or officer's liability to the corporation, its creditors and shareholders, except where, with respect to the particular issue, some other state has a more significant relationship under the principles stated in § 6 to the parties and the transaction, in which event the local law of [*23]  the other state will be applied.

Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 309 (1971). See also Mukamal v. Bakes, 378 Fed. Appx. 890, 896-97 (11th Cir. 2010) (applying § 309 to a breach of fiduciary claim). Section 145 of the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws provides:
(1) The rights and liabilities of the parties with respect to an issue in tort are determined by the local law of the state which, with respect to that issue, has the most significant relationship to the occurrence and the parties under the principles stated in § 6.

(2) Contacts to be taken into account in applying the principles of § 6 to determine the law applicable to an issue include:

(a) the place where the injury occurred,

(b) the place where the conduct causing the injury occurred,

(c) the domicil, residence, nationality, place of incorporation and place of business of the parties, and

(d) the place where the relationship, if any, between the parties is centered.

Section 145 advises that "[t]hese contacts are to be evaluated according to their relative importance with respect to the particular issue."

Grupo Televisa, 485 F.3d at 1240.
Plaintiffs argue that because OZcoin is incorporated in the state of Texas, this Court must apply Texas law to the breach of fiduciary duty claims. The undersigned disagrees, for to do so would be to elevate form over substance. On the whole, the conduct giving rise to the alleged injury in this case [*24]  took place in Queensland, Australia, involved Australian gold, Australian actors, Australian documents, and in most other pertinent respects was centered in Australia. The only involvement that Texas has in this case is that OZcoin is incorporated there and the marketing of OzGLD began there. By contrast, the acts that gave rise to the very formation of OZcoin, as well as the alleged breach of fiduciary duty, occurred in Australia. Accordingly, the undersigned concludes that the State of Queensland, Australia, has a more significant relationship with the torts alleged in Counts 1, 2, and 3, and that the law of Queensland, not Texas, should govern those counts.

Counts 4, 5, and 6 of the Complaint allege conversion and aiding and abetting conversion. Section 147 of the Restatement addresses conversion claims and states that "the local law of the state where the injury occurred determines the rights and liabilities of the parties . . . unless some other state has a more significant relationship . . ." Counts 4 and 5 allege that Defendant Citigold converted property belonging to OZcoin by causing the liens on the Australian gold to be released. Although OZcoin claims that it was injured by these actions in the United [*25]  States, Texas has a minimal relationship to the issues in these counts. Counts 4 and 5 pertain to conversion in Australia of property in Australia and of liens that were recorded and released under Australian law. The state with the most significant relationship to the events alleged in Counts 4 and 5 is in Australia, either Queensland State or New South Wales State.

Count 6 is also a conversion claim, in which Plaintiffs allege that Defendant J. Breytenbach converted a "hard wallet device" allegedly belonging to OZcoin, to his own use. The hard wallet in question is in Australia (DE 15). Thus the property allegedly converted, and the alleged act of conversion, occurred in Australia. For these reasons, and those already discussed, Queensland, Australia has a greater relationship with the issues in Count 6 than does Florida. Therefore, the law of Queensland, Australia, applies to Count 6.

Counts 7 and 8 allege deceptive and unfair trade practices, and conspiracy to commit the same, under the Florida Deceptive and Unfair Trade Practices Act (FDUTPA), Fla. Stat. § 501.201 et seq. Count 10 seeks injunctive relief under FDUTPA. However, a review of the Complaint establishes that FDUTPA would have no application to the [*26]  events and agreements alleged in the Complaint, as the alleged wrongful acts occurred in Australia. Florida courts have held that FDUTPA does not apply to actions that occurred outside of Florida. Stein v. Marquis Yachts, LLC, No. 14-24756-CIV, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 35088, 2015 WL 1288146, at *6 (S.D. Fla. Mar. 20, 2015) (citing Millennium Communs. & Fulfillment, Inc. v. Office of the AG, Dep't of Legal Affairs, 761 So. 2d 1256, 1262 (Fla. 3d DCA 2000); Coastal Physician Services of Broward County, Inc. v. Ortiz, 764 So.2d 7, 8 (Fla. 4th DCA 1999)). Given that these counts are unlikely to survive even if the case were to remain in this District, the undersigned concludes that the choice of law is not material to the forum non conveniens analysis.

Finally, in Count 9, ADSI seeks a preliminary injunction against Citigold, an Australian company. According to the Complaint, Citigold agreed to participate in pre-suit mediation or other agreed upon alternative dispute resolution in any disputes with ADSI over the OZcoin Agreement (DE 1-9). ADSI seeks to enjoin Citigold from taking any action with respect to the development, marketing, or sale of any precious-metal-backed cryptocurrency or from otherwise implementing any portion of the business plan developed by Plaintiffs, as referenced in the OZcoin Agreement. Given that the OZcoin agreement is, by its terms, governed by Texas law, the undersigned concludes that, at best, the choice of law issue on Count 9 is not material to the forum [*27]  non conveniens analysis. To the contrary, issues of comity and affording the Australian courts the opportunity to regulate the behavior of an Australian corporation, weigh in favor of dismissal on the ground of forum non conveniens. See Ford v. Brown, 319 F.3d 1302, 1310 (11th Cir. 2003) (international comity principles favor allowing foreign nations to regulate the conduct of their own citizens).



III. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the undersigned respectfully RECOMMENDS that Defendants' Motion to Dismiss for Forum Non Conveniens (DE 12) be GRANTED; that the Complaint for Damages and Injunctive Relief (DE 1) be DISMISSED; and that Plaintiffs be instructed that any future complaint arising from the same subject matter be filed in Australia.

The parties will have fourteen (14) days from the date of being served with a copy of this Report and Recommendation within which to file written objections, if any, with the Honorable Federico A. Moreno, United States District Judge. Failure to file objections timely shall bar the parties from a de novo determination by the District Judge of an issue covered in the Report and shall bar the parties from attacking on appeal unobjected-to factual and legal conclusions contained in this Report [*28]  except upon grounds of plain error if necessary in the interest of justice. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 149, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985); Henley v. Johnson, 885 F.2d 790, 794 (1989); 11th Cir. R. 3-1 (2016).

DONE AND SUBMITTED in Chambers, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, this 23rd day of March 2018.

/s/ Barry S. Seltzer

BARRY S. SELTZER

United States Magistrate Judge

Footnotes
1Link to the location of the note in the document
Ira Carlin and Terry Bresnick are United States citizens who were associated with OZcoin for approximately two and one-half months, from February 17, 2017, when they were appointed to OZcoin's Board, to May 5, 2017, when they resigned.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
In their post-hearing memorandum [DE 42] Defendants note that Google, Inc. maintains a presence in Sydney, Australia. Consequently, an Australian court can exert compulsory process over Google and a subpoena can be served in Sydney. Furthermore, Defendants note that the procedure for obtaining documents via Australia from Google's home headquarters in the United States is much less cumbersome than in the United States, because requests from Australia are not subject to the limitations imposed by the United States Stored Communications Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq.